Baseline Survey Report 
to 
 
Assess User Satisfaction of Agro-Meteorological Advisories 
and Products Under the Agro-Meteorological Information 
Systems Development Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 2018

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
 No. 
 Acronyms 
 Executive Summary i-vi 
 
Chapter-1 Background of the Study 1-8 
 1.1 Introduction 1 
 1.2 Background and Rationale of the Project 1 
 1.3 Component of the project 3 
 1.4 Outputs of the project 6 
 1.5 Objectives of the baseline survey 7 
 1.6 Scope of the Work 7 
 1.7 Purpose of Baseline Survey 8 
Chapter-2 Approach and Methodology 9-19 
 2.1 Approaches 9 
 2.2 Methodology 9 
 2.2.1 Organization of the team of experts 10 
 2.2.2 Desk Study: Collection and Review of Data, Reports and 
Information 

 2.2.3 Set up of a working group on the national level 11 
 2.2.4 Preparation of Inception Report 11 
 2.3 Design of the study 11 
 2.4 Sample Design 12 
 2.4.1 Summary of the data and information collection is presented below 17 
 2.5 Development and Finalization of Questionnaire 17 
 2.6 Recruitment and Training of Field Staff 17 
 2.7 Data Collection 18 
 2.8 Quality Assurance Measures of Data 18 
 2.9 Data Management, Processing and Analysis 19 
Chapter-3 3.0 Farmer's Basic Information 20-23 
 3.1 General information of the farmer 20 
 3.1.1 Gender and marital status of respondents 20 
 3.1.2 Education level of respondents 20 
 3.1.3 Major sources of income 21 
 3.1.4 Members of the family and engaged with agriculture 21 
 3.1.5 Owner of the lands 21 
 3.1.6 Soil type of the land under the household 22 
 3.1.7 Land type of the farmers 23 
 3.1.8 Utilization of irrigation on land 23 
Chapter-4 4.0 Weather and Climate Induced Problems 24-34 
 4.1 Upazila-wise past two years weather and climate information 24 
 4.2 Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-1 (Aus) 
for crop production 

 4.3 Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-2 (Aman) 
 for crop production 

 4.4 Weather and climate induced problems in Rabi (Boro) 
for crop production 

 4.5 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots areas of drought, 
cold wave, nor 'wester, pest & disease

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 4.6 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots areas of cyclone 
& storm surge, salinity intrusion, pest & disease 

 4.7 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area 
of flash flood or pre-monsoon flood 

 4.8 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area 
 of forest degradation 

 4.9 Extent of crop damages due to the weather and climatic problems 32 
 4.10 Frequency of weather and climatic problems 33 
 4.11 Problems faced during 2016 and 2017 33 
 4.12 Average production loss 34 
Chapter-5 5.0 Agro-Metrological Related Information 35-46 
 5.1 Source of agro-meteorological information 35 
 5.2 Perception about the Govt. organization providing weather & climate 
related information 

 5.3 Perception about the govt. organization providing flood related 
information 

 5.4 Getting enough time after receiving information to save damage of 
your crops and properties 5.3 Perception about the govt. 
organization providing flood related information 

 5.5 Minimum advance forecast time 37 
 5.6 Knowledge about roles of BMD 38 
 5.7 Knowledge about roles of BWDB 38 
 5.8 Knowledge about role of DAE on agro-met services 39 
 5.9 Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE 39 
 5.10 Channel of meteorological information delivery 40 
 5.11 Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 40 
 5.12 Source of getting information 41 
 5.13 Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 41 
 5.14 Benefit of meteorological information 41 
 5.15 Necessity of agro-meteorological advisories and services 42 
 5.16 Adoption of new technology and techniques 42 
 5.17 Type of techniques to be adopted 43 
 5.18 5.18 Knowledge on existing weather forecast to protect crop 
production 

 5.19 Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 44 
 5.20 Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 44 
 5.21 Traditional methods used for applying weather forecasts 45 
 5.22 Perception of traditional weather forecasts 45 
 5.23 Type of crops to be grown based on forecast 46 
 5.24 Decisions making time for planting crops 46 
Chapter-6 User Satisfaction Index using Baseline Survey 41-54 
 6.1 Knowledge or experience of the farmers on weather forecast 41 
 6.2 Practice of using different weather forecast by farmers 41 
 6.3 Weather related knowledge prior to agro-activities 42 
 6.4 User's Satisfaction Level on the accuracy of weather -related 
information 

 6.5 Knowledge about the service of Bangladesh Agriculture 
Meteorological Information System (BAMIS) 

 6.6 Source of Agro-Meteorological Information 45 
 6.7 Perception about the Govt. organization providing weather & climate 
related information 

 6.8 Perception about the govt. organization providing flood related 
information

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 6.9 Timing of information to save crops and properties from the 
damages 

 6.10 Minimum advance forecast time 47 
 6.11 Knowledge about Role of BMD 47 
 6.12 Knowledge about Role of BWDB 48 
 6.13 Knowledge about the Role of DAE on agro-met services 48 
 6.14 Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE 49 
 6.15 Channel of meteorological information delivery 49 
 6.16 Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 49 
 6.17 Source of getting information 50 
 6.18 Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 50 
 6.19 Benefit of meteorological information 50 
 6.20 Necessity of agro-meteorological advisories and services 51 
 6.21 Knowledge on existing weather forecast to protect crop production 51 
 6.22 Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 52 
 6.23 Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 52 
 6.24 Traditional methods used for applying weather forecasts 53 
 6.25 Perception of traditional weather forecasts 53 
 6.26 Participated in any awareness campaign/training regarding weather 
forecast 

Chapter-7 Training and Awareness 55-59 
 7.1 Knowledge on agro-meteorological weather forecast and cope-up 
techniques 

 7.2 Techniques of coping-up this problem 56 
 7.3 Participated in any awareness campaign/training regarding 
weather forecast 

 7.4 Willingness to participate in any awareness campaign or training 48 
 7.5 Location of training 49 
 7.6 Areas of interest for awareness campaign or training 58 
 7.7 Preferred ways for receiving weather and climate forecasts 58 
Chapter-8 8.0 Major Findings and Recommendations 60-61 
 8.1 Major findings 60 
 8.2 Recommendations 61 
 
References 62 
 
 
 List of Tables 
Table-2.1 Summary of Basic Statistics of the Farmers in Project Area 14 
Table-2.2 Distribution of Sample Farmers by Farm Holdings 15 
Table-2.3 Upazila-wise sample distribution 15 
Table-2.4 Number and Types of Respondents 17 
Table-3.1 Marital status of the respondents 20 
Table-3.2 Education level of respondents 20 
Table-3.3 Number of members in the family and engaged with agriculture 21 
Table-3.4 Land area under the household 22 
Table-3.5 Soil type of the land under the household 22 
Table-3.6 Land type of the farmers 23 
Table-4.1 Upazila-wise-past two years weather and climate information 25 
Table-4.2 Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-1 (Aus) season 26 
Table-4.3 Weather and Climate induced problems in Kharif-2 (Aman) season 27 
Table-4.4 Weather and climate induced problems in Rabi (Boro) season 28 
Table-4.5 Weather and climate induced problems in Rabi (Boro) season 29

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Table-4.6 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of 
cyclone & storm surge, salinity intrusion, pest & disease 

Table-4.7 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of Flash/ 
Pre-Monsoon Flood 

Table-4.8 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area 
of forest degradation 

Table-4.9 Problems faced during 2016 and 2017 34 
Table-5.1 Meteorological related information in the project area 35 
Table-5.2 Perception about Roles of BWDB 38 
Table-5.3 Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-
meteorological information 

Table-5.4 Channel of meteorological information delivery 40 
Table-5.5 Source of getting hydro-meteorological information 41 
Table-5.6 Benefit of meteorological information 42 
Table-5.7 Type of techniques to be adopted 43 
Table-5.8 Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 43 
Table-5.9 Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 45 
Table-5.10 Decision on type of crops to be grown based on forecast 46 
Table-6.1 Districts-wise knowledge or experience farmer's on weather 
forecast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table-7.1 Participation in any awareness campaign or training regarding 
weather forecast 

Table-7.2 Areas of interest for awareness campaign or training 50 
Table-7.3 Preferred ways of receiving weather and climate forecasts 50 
Table-7.4 Preferred ways for receiving weather and climate forecasts 
 
 
 List of Figures 
Figure-3.1 Major source of farmers' income 21 
Figure-3.2 Response on the utilization of irrigation on agricultural land by 
the farmers 

Figure-4.1 Extent of crop damages due to weather and climatic problems 32 
Figure-4.2 Frequency of weather and climatic problems faced during crop 
production 

Figure-4.3 Average production loss due to problems 34 
Figure-5.1 Knowledge about the organization providing weather & climate 
information 

Figure-5.2 Knowledge about the organization providing flood information 36 
Figure-5.3 Timing of information to save crops and properties from the 
damages 

Figure-5.4 Minimum advance forecast time required to save crop from the 
damages 

Figure-5.5 Perception about Role of DAE on Agro-met Services 39 
Figure-5.6 Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 40 
Figure-5.7 Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 41 
Figure-5.8 Necessity of agro-meteorological services 42

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Figure-5.9 Adoption of new technology and techniques 43 
Figure-5.10 Knowledge of existing weather forecast to protect crop production 44 
Figure-5.11 Perception of traditional weather forecasts 45 
Figure-5.12 Decision making time for planting crops 46 
 
Appendix-1 Beneficiaries Questionnaire (A &B) (Bangla and English) 
Appendix-2 FGD Guideline (A &B) (Bangla and English) 
Appendix-3 Upazila Information (A &B) (Bangla and English) 
Appendix-4 Photographs of FGD and KII of Sample Districts 
Appendix-5 Climate and Weather-related information from UAO 
Appendix-6 Area wise average annual rainfall MAP 
Appendix-7 TOR of the Study

DTCL Page-1 
CHAPTER-1 
 
BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY 
 
1.1 Introduction 
 
The baseline survey report was prepared in accordance with the provision of contract 
agreement signed between the Project Director (PD) of Agro -Meteorological Information 
Systems Development Project (AMISDP) and Development Technical Consultants Pvt. 
Limited (DTCL) on 29 March 2018. Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd. (DTCL) is 
pleased to the project authority for selecting DTCL for conducting the baseline survey to 
Assess User Satisfactions of Agro-Meteorological Advisories and Products". This AMISDP is 
a part of Component-C of Bangladesh Weather and Climate Services Regional Project 
(BWCSRP) which is implementing in 487 upazilas of 64 districts under 8 divisions of 
Bangladesh. The baseline survey was conducted in 16 sample upazilas of Rajshahi, 
Naogaon, Patu akhali, Satkhira, Sunamganj, Net rokona, Khagrachari and Banda rban 
districts. 
 
The aim of the project is to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Agricultural 
Extension (DAE) of the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) to deliver reliable weather, water 
and climate information/advisories or services. The objectives of the project will be achieved 
in i mproving access to such services for farmers and communities to cope-up with the 
weather and climate risks therefore increase agricultural production. The project is 
implementing by the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA) from July 2016 and will be continued until June 2021. 
 
1.2 Background and Rationale of the Project 
 
Agriculture is the main driving force of th e economy of Bangladesh, which is highly 
dependent on climatic phenomena. Despite technological improvement s such as improved 
crop varieties and irrigation system, weather and climate are still key factors in agricultural 
productivity. Changes in temperature, erratic behavior of rainfall, increasing frequency and 
intensity of weather-related extreme events inclu ding floods, droughts, cyclone and storm -
surge influence changes in cropping patterns and seasons. Salinity intrusion into inland 
water and soil are other major climate change related threats to agriculture. The impact of 
climate change on agriculture coul d result in problems with food security and may threaten 
the livelihood activities upon which much of the population depends. 
 
The hydro-meteorological information infrastructure over land, atmosphere and ocean, 
basic public weather services, forecasting, and multi-hazard end-to-end early warning 
systems of the country is still weak and need to be updated and strengthened. Agriculture 
sector needs tailored weather and climate data and services which are very essential for 
proper planning and decision-making to mitigate the adverse effects of climate variability 
and changes. Provision of these types of services is still limited and needs to be 
strengthened for the effectiveness of agro-met service delivery. 
The food production in Bangladesh is highly vulnerable due to the erratic behavior of 
climatic phenomena. However, the rate of variation is not same in all the parts of the 
country. Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) is only the mandated organization 
to generate early warning related to weather and climate hazards along with weather and 
climate prediction information and agro-met services. Currently, BMD provides agro 
climatic advisory bulletin to the Department of Agriculture Extension ( DAE) and relevant 
other organizations (BMD, 2007). The bulletins also give some advice to the farmers 
against the disastrous impacts, such as probable water stress, pest infe stations and 
diseases, winter fog and cold weather, soil moisture, sunshine hours, solar radiation, 
temperature, evaporation and humidity, etc. However, BMD issued forecast is not easy to 
understand for all of the farmers. Moreover, most of the farmers still do not have the 
facilities to access this information due to lack of required support of the equipment.

DTCL Page-2 
Considering the above importance of the sector, the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) with 
support from the World Bank (WB) is implementing the "Agro-Meteorological Information 
Systems Development Project (AMISDP)" under the Component-C of "Bangladesh Weather 
and Climate Services Regional Project (BWCSRP)" to strengthen the capacity of the DAE 
regarding agro -met service delivery . The project will assist in delivering reliable weather 
and climate information /advisories or services to the farmers and communities . The 
objectives of the project will be achieved by strengthening hydro -meteorological 
information/advisories and forecasting delivery related to weather, climate and flood for 
multi-hazard disaster risk management of the agricultural sector . Therefore, hydro-
meteorological services delivery will be improved to increase agricultural production . 
 
The project is aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDG-2) (end hunger, achieve 
food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture), SDG -13 (Take 
urgent action to combat Climate Change and its impact) and SDG -15 (Protect, restore and 
promote sustain able use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and reserve land degradation and halt biodiversity loss). 
 
The project fully conforms to 7th Five Year Plan-4.3.1. Plan Policies and strategies for Crop 
Sub-Sector: Technology based weather prediction and forecasting. 
 
The project targets 30,000 lead farmers to be direct beneficiaries and 300,000 farmers will 
be indirect beneficiaries of the project. This project will increase and sustain the present 
agricultural production through modernized agro -meteorological advisories, early warning 
and forecasting. It will provide better decision-making process of the farming community. 
This project will also help farmers to reduce their production loss by effective u se of agro -
met advisories.1 
 
The summary of the project at a glance is given below: 
1 Name of the Project Agro-Meteorological Information Systems 
Development Project (AMISDP) 
2 Administrative Ministry Ministry of Agriculture 
3 Funding Agency The World Bank and Government of Bangladesh (GOB) 
4 Implementing/ Executing 
Agency Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) 
5 Location of the Project 4051 Union Parishads of 487 Upazilas of 64 Districts of 
08 Divisions 
6 Estimated Cost 
(Lakh Taka) Total: 11,918.08 GOB: 1304.38 
PA: 10613.70 (World Bank) 
7 Implementation Period Date of Commencement Date of Completion 
July 2016 June 2021 
Source: PAD of BWCSRP 
 
1.3 Component of the project 
 
The brief description s of the component and sub -components of the AMISDP had been 
described as follows: 
 
Component C- Agro-Meteorological Information Systems Development: Component C 
is implementing by the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), with the support of the 
Agricultural Meteorology Division of the Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD). Th e 
main sub-components include: 
 
 Sub-Component C1: Establishment of the Bangladesh Agro -Meteorological 
Information System (BAMIS); 
 
1 Project Appraisal Document (PAD) of BWCSRP)

DTCL Page-3 
 Sub-Component C2: Training, Capacity Building, Project Management, Monitoring 
and Evaluation; and 
 Sub-Component C3 : Agricultu ral Disaster Risk Management through agro -
meteorological information dissemination. 
 
The brief description of the sub-components is furnished below: 
 
Sub-Component C.1: Establishment of the Bangladesh Agro -Meteorological 
Information System (BAMIS) 
 
This sub -component supports the establishment of BAMIS web portal for the provision of 
data, information, Agro -Meteorological advisories and products such as crop and weather 
bulletins, drought and heat directories, climate-weather risk maps and services such as short 
and medium range weather forecasts and seasonal climate outlooks to stakeholders on the 
web. Specifically, this sub-component will support the following activities: 
 
 Setting up a Comprehensive web-portal for BAMIS at DAE, 
 BAMIS infrastructure, 
 Development of upazila level agro-met databases, 
 Agro-met data analysis and future scenario development, 
 Development of advisories and 
 Risk mapping of climate vulnerable communities. 
 
This component will provide improved Agro -Meteorological services to farmers across the 
country to sustain and increase agricultural production in coping with extremes weather and 
climate. It will support to establish a science -based agro-met information and products to 
mitigate climate -related agricultural production risks. Th is will also support to improve the 
capacity of DAE officials at different levels for effective delivery of climate information and 
services to the farmers. The following major activities will be performed through the 
component: 
 
Development of upazila level agro -meteorological databases: In 200 upazilas of the 
country where Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) (installed under component A) will provide 
real-time data on all i mportant weather variables. The project is supporting digitali zation of 
historical and current agricultural data on the land holdings, crops/cropping systems 
cultivated by farmers, average crop y ields in different upazilas etc., (currently available as 
hard copy documents). Under the technical guidance of an International Agro-Meteorological 
Consultant, DAE, with BMD support, integrating the AWS weather and agricultural data and 
compiling Agro-Meteorological databases for the 487 upazilas, which will be loc ated in the 
BAMIS at DAE. These Agro -Meteorological databases will be used to conduct a variety of 
Agro-Meteorological analyses and to generate information and products for use by the 
farming communities in different upazilas. 
 
Agro-Meteorological data ana lysis and future scenario generation: The p roject is 
supporting a technical consultancy on conducting Agro -Meteorological data analyses, future 
scenario generation, including the use of crop models and downscaling the scenarios to 
block level. Currently, BMD operates 12 Agro -Meteorological stations (out of its 57 weather 
stations) with long term data for over 40 years for most of the stations. The consultant will 
assist DAE to develop computations of clim atological norms for rainfall, maximum and 
minimum air temperatures, rainfall probabilities, and combine them with the upazila 
databases to prepare crop suitability maps for different agro climatic regions in the country. 
The consultant will guide DAE, with support from BARI, BRRI, BSRI, BJRI and BMD, in 
developing Agro -Meteorological products for decision support including the selection of 
optimal planting dates based on expected climate conditions etc. The consultant will also 
provide assistance in training and capacity building of DAE, BARI, BRRI, BSRI, BJRI and 
BMD staff on using Agro -Meteorological data, generation of information on soil and crop 
management practices, and on using a variety of crop models and other tools.

DTCL Page-4 
Development of Agro -Meteorological advisories and products for the farming 
communities: The consultant will help DAE to use the Agro -Meteorological databases and 
develop Agro -Meteorological advisories and products for use of farmers to make tactical 
decisions on planting, irrigation, harvesting and processing based on extreme weather 
events such as heavy rainfall, hail storms etc. It will also support them for implementing crop 
protection measures on pests and diseases risk reduction. 
 
Risk mapping of climate-vulnerable farming communities: Given the frequent incidence 
of weather and climate extreme events and the large impact , it is important to identify the 
vulnerability of farming communities. The component will support the procurement of a 
consultant in DAE to conduct agricultural disast er risk analysis based on weather and 
climate information, socio-economic factors such as farmer land holdings and indebtedness, 
soils information, crops/cropping patterns etc. The analysis will be done at the agro -
ecological zone level. Each climate risk can be identified by its natural characteristics, 
impacts on different geographical areas, time of year it is mostly occurs, and its severity etc., 
The project will guide the preparation of the climate risk vulnerability maps for all 487 
upazilas identifying the areas at risk and vulnerable. Accordingly, DAE and BMD officials will 
be trained in risk mapping. The component will also explore areas for collaboration with the 
students from appropriate Universities in this task. 
 
Sub-component C.2 Training, Capacity Building, Project Management and Monitoring 
and Evaluation: 
 
This Sub-Component aims to strengthen Agro-Meteorological capacity development, project 
management and monitoring and evaluation of project activities. It includes the following 
activities: 
 
a. Sub-Component C2.1 Provision of technical training to staff: This will support 
provision of technical training to professional staff of DAE, BARI, BRRI, BSRI and BJRI: This 
includes, (a) organization of workshops/ seminars at the BAMIS headquarters in Agro -
Meteorological data analysis and development of products and (b) organization of short term 
training and exposure visits to appropriate institutions and organizations abroad to promote a 
better understanding of the current methods and approaches in the development of Agro -
Meteorological advisories and products. Given t he diversity of weather and climate in 
different agro ecological regions in the country and the range of crops and cropping systems 
which farmers cultivate, there are a number of critical weather, climate and agriculture issues 
on which advanced informatio n will be needed to develop effective strategies to maintain 
agricultural productivity. Hence priority issues will be identified which require detailed 
technical studies and this component will support the recruitment of a Consultant to organize 
such technical studies. As DAE has a good network of offices in the 64 districts providing 
information to farmers, this network will be used for the organization of workshops at the 
regional, district and upazila levels for officials in the use of BAMIS Portal tools . This project 
will provide 74 batches of officers, 367 batches of SAAOs and 1000 batches of farmers 
training. Around 25 National and 70 Regional workshops will also be arranged by the project. 
Eighty percent budget allocation of the foreign training will cover for foreign training of DAE 
officials and 20 percent will be allocated for exposure visit. Officials of DAE, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Planning Commission will be nominated for exposure visit. 
The vision for the Agro -Meteorological Information Syst ems in Bangladesh is an integrated 
system in which the meteorological community and the agricultural community represented 
by BMD, DAE, and NARS will work together to produce and disseminate climate and 
weather information relevant to agriculture thus enha ncing climate resiliency and food 
security in the country. This requires close collaboration between the different agencies 
responsible for Agro -Meteorological data collection and analysis, agricultural research and 
extension. Hence a Joint Technical Wo rking Group (JTWG) on Agro -meteorology will be 
established with the participation of experts from DAE, BARI, BRRI, BSRI, BJRI, BMD and 
BWDB and support will be provided for the effective functioning of the working group and for 
the implementation of the decisions taken by the group.

DTCL Page-5 
 
b. Sub-Component C 2.2 Project management, Monitoring and Evaluation: Sub-
Component C2.2 will support costs associated with the PIU, operational costs related to 
DAE operations, additional technical studies, and activities associated with M&E, social 
outreach and other operational activities. 
 
Sub-Component C.3: Agricultural Disaster Risk Management through Agro - 
meteorological information dissemination: 
 
This sub-component will s upport the awareness building and dissemination to farmers of a 
variety of customized Agro -Meteorological products and tools that will help them to better 
utilize weather and climate risk in their planning and cope with agricultural disaster risk. The 
activities include: (1) assessmen t of farmer's needs for weather and climate services; (2) 
installation of automatic rain gauges and agro -meteorological display boards at the Union 
Parishad locations; (3) establishment of kiosks, (4) development of mobile apps; (5) 
organization of roving seminars and (6) feedback from farmers. 
 
This sub-component supported by the consultant to conduct a baseline survey for a detailed 
assessment of farmer's needs for weather and climate services. Feedback from farmers will 
guide quality improvements in Agro -Meteorological products and their dissemination 
mechanisms. Given the diversity of crops and cropping systems in the 64 distric ts around 
the country, the need assessments will contribute to the development and dissemination of 
need-based advisories and products. 
 
1.4 Outputs of the project 
 
 The project increase d the capacity of DAE regarding agro -meteorology. Agro -met 
advisories will help the farming community to reduce their production loss and better 
decision making in farming practices. 
 Farmers able to use agro -met advisories and send feedback services for user 
satisfaction. 
 Crop simulation model and future scenario generation will help to make future plans 
and policies in the agriculture sector. 
 BAMIS portal facilitated to get hydro-meteorological information of Bangladesh. 
 Digitalization of Upazila information will help to utilize GIS and Rem ote Sensing 
Technology. 
 
1.5 Objectives of the baseline survey 
 
The main objective of this study is to assess the baseline situation of agro-meteorological 
(e.g. agro -met) services in Bangladesh to increase agricultural productivity and assist the 
farmers in coping with changing weather and extreme climatic events. However, the 
specific objectives of the study are as follows: 
 
▪ To identify the weather or climate induced hazards effects on agriculture and on 
their livelihood; 
▪ To identify what type of agro-meteorological services available in Bangladesh and 
who are the service providers; 
▪ To identify existing agro -meteorological information, ongoing observed parameters 
and technologies of BMD; 
▪ To assess the farmer's knowledge and perception on agro-met services at the 
community level; 
▪ To assess the seasonal variation of climatic and weather parameters (e.g. rainfall , 
temperature etc.) and farmer's perception in relation to crop planning and crop 
productivity; 
▪ To collect the information regarding agro -met services and products, its 
functionality, effectiveness and user satisfaction; 
▪ To assess the need/new requirements for agro-met services in order to ensure and

DTCL Page-6 
develop effective and user friendly agro -met advisory services for ensuring crop 
productivity and food security; 
▪ To collect region specifi c information on land use pattern, demography, hydro - 
meteorology, agricultural practices, current management practices by farmers and 
the way of solving problems faced by extreme climatic events; 
▪ To assess whether the existing climate forecast can address the climate variability 
and recommend necessary arrangements and give recommendations for its 
improvement; 
 
1.6 Scope of the Work 
 
The scope of works of the survey is to: 
 
• identify the study areas (e.g. District/Upazila/Union) based on the climatic problems 
and hotspots and expert opinion; 
• identify and select tools and methods for conducting agro -meteorological baseline 
survey; 
• identify the weather or climate induced problems on agriculture and on their 
livelihood through farmers mind/sketch maps and community consultation; 
• review of the farmer's knowledge and perception on agro -met services at community 
level 
• observe the seasonal variation of climatic and weather parameters (e.g. rainfall, 
temperature etc.) and farmer's perception in relation to crop planning and crop 
productivity 
• identify and review the existing documents, advisory tools, products and research 
work relevant to agro-meteorological services in Bangladesh; 
• collect information regarding existing land use pattern, problems regarding climatic 
events in connection with crop production and the knowledge base, farmers are 
practicing to solve the challenges; 
• find out gaps and weakness of the present agro-met services; 
• analysis of agro-climate forecast dissemination network; 
• assess institutional capacity regarding dissemination of agro-metrological services to 
the farmers; and develop survey tools to conduct the households survey. At least 
1000 questionnaire survey will be done at household level considering climate 
induced agricultural constraint. 
 
1.7 Purpose of Baseline Survey 
 
The baseline survey was conducted to collect benchmark of the project situation so that it 
can compare with the progress of the project activities especially with Mid -term evaluation 
and end of project evaluation data with the target of the resu lt-framework data to assess the 
project impact or changes due to this intervention.

DTCL Page-7 
CHAPTER-2 
 
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY 
 
2.1 Approaches 
 
The consultant's approach was in line with the main objective of the study that seeks to 
gather information and provide the complete picture of the baseline status of agro 
meteorological (e.g. agro -met) services in Bangladesh to increase agricultural produ ctivity 
and assist the farmers in coping with changing the weather and extreme climatic events . 
More precisely the survey revealed the following answers of the project: (a) weather or 
climate induced problems on agriculture and on the livelihood of farmers; (b) farmer's 
knowledge and perception on agro-met services at community level; (c) seasonal variation of 
climatic and weather parameters (e.g. rainfall, temperature etc.) in relation to crop planning 
and crop productivity ; (d) existing agro-meteorological services in Bangladesh; (e) existing 
farmers' land use pattern, problems regarding climatic events in conn ection with crop 
production to solve the challenges; (f) gaps and weakness of the present agro-met services; 
(g) agro-climate forecast dissemination network; and (h) institutional capacity regarding 
dissemination of agro-metrological services to the farmers. A wide range of efforts has been 
done such as i) inception of assignment with PIU-AMISDP/DAE; i) in house meetings among 
the consultants at DTCL office to prepare the inception report; iii) sharing of inception 
activities through workshop with the project officials and other experts of DAE at Head 
Quarter Level; and iv) field visit and interview of relevant stakeholders aiming to gather 
objective oriented information; v) baseline report has been made in accordance with the 
objective and scope of the study. 
 
2.2 Methodology 
 
The methodology for the present baseline survey used system -wide approach, which was 
both detailed and participatory. This approach involve d wide-ranging and sequenced 
discussion with PD/PMU and DAE professionals and officials related to assess the socio -
economic and benchmark situation of the project area. The survey involved use of: 
 
(i) formal and non-formal interviews; 
(ii) semi-structured interviews by means of focus group discussions and 
(iii) field survey through a structured questionnaire 
(iv) collection of secondary information 
(v) review available reports and 
(vi) series of reconnaissance field visits by consultants to the project area. 
 
The reconnaissance field visits covered the substantial part of the project area. During the 
field visit, consultants interacted with conc erned DAE, BMD and BWDB personnel of the 
survey area. The detailed description of the common activities of the survey has been 
presented in the following pages: 
In accordance with the TOR, the Inception Phase was covered in 30 days for the baseline 
survey and was basically aimed at preparing the ground for the survey activities. During this 
phase, the consultant, through the Team of consultants, was engaged in an open and 
inclusive process with the client and other stakeholders in order to collect and assim ilate all 
relevant current information that was enabled to make an assessment of the survey 
environment and of the pertinence of the TOR vis -à-vis the actual situation. Following 
discussions and feedback, the final approval of the inception report was taken from the PD. 
During this phase the following tasks were implemented: 
 
2.2.1 Organization of the team of experts 
 
The inception of the services initiated after signing Contract Agreement between the 
PD/PMU and the consulting firm. Consultants and support staff have been deployed to take

DTCL Page-8 
up their individual works as per specific inputs stipulated for them in the TOR. T he Team 
Leader has organized and set the stage for this. The consultant mobilized both staff and 
logistics together with all arrangements for backup supports and communication. The TL and 
other specialists (according to staffing schedule), as well as support staff, started functioning 
according to the given tasks and times allocated to them. The TL met PIU consultants of 
AMISDP at PD's office after submitting draft inception report for follow -up and seeking 
comments and suggestions from PIU and DAE . The sur vey consultancy office was 
accommodated in the firm premises with all furniture and other utilities and together with 
security arrangements. 
 
2.2.2 Desk Study: Collection and Review of Data, Reports and Information 
 
Immediately after the commencement of th e survey, the team of experts started analyzing 
relevant documents and existing data on the current development in agriculture in 
Bangladesh. Some of those documents ha d already been collected during the phase of 
preparation of the technical proposal. Those background relevant documents had been 
analyzed by the team of experts in order to provide an outline of the initial assessment and 
fact finding and have been included in the draft baseline report. 
 
Further, the role of the DAE and the different bodies was analyzed on the basis of policy 
papers and laws in order to draft a detailed scheduled on sharing of responsibilities and 
leading a professional dialogue with these authorities. In addition, detailed review of: (i) 
existing documents on concept, definition, classification and methodology for assessing the 
implementation status of the project components and results and outcomes of project 
support and services; (ii) sim ilar works done in the past in different countries and benefit 
from the findings; (iii) to be undertaken in designing the proposed survey, implementing it, 
analyzing the feedback and preparing reports. The review of relevant documents and data 
collected from secondary sources was done by the senior members of the survey team prior 
to finalization of methodology and data gathering instruments. The consultants were reviewed 
all the existing literature and documents prepared for the project, monitoring/ progre ss 
reports, DPP, appraisal documents, policy papers, tools and formats for conducting the 
survey and its consequences based on the outcomes indicators and report. The survey team 
was collected relevant literature from the DAE offices. The consultants liste d the main 
factors such as household demographics, crops production, consumption, storage, 
marketing, food security and nutrition status, financial status and training etc. The 
consultants gathered baseline information which was used for analyzing the impa ct and 
implications of the project from its implementation status, achievements and challenges, best 
practices and lessons learned. 
 
2.2.3 Set up of a working group on the national level 
 
As indicated in the general approach, the creation of a working group is an important 
element for ensuring the participation of stakeholders in the implementation of the survey, 
toward the sustainability of the survey results. Therefore, during the incepti on phase, the 
consultant in cooperation with the partner created the working group, with the objective of 
establishing close working relations with the client and relevant stakeholders. A list of 
possible stakeholders was prepared in order to identify the members of the Working Group 
(WG), and the team of experts established direct contact with them and explained objectives 
and the importance of being becoming a member of the WG. The team of experts shared 
with them information about the survey and requested their feedback. Virtual meetings using 
ICT technology was organized. In addition, the members of the Working Groups accessed 
internal portal of the survey, which was part of the DTCL website in order to provide 
feedback on data collection and diagnostic work. They were involved in the assessment of 
information and data collection; in the elaboration of the methodology for data and 
information collection and in the preparation of the survey.

DTCL Page-9 
2.2.4 Preparation of Inception Report 
 
At the end of the inception phase, the team of experts has prepared the inception report that 
was delivered to the client for review and approval. The inception report was an opportunity 
to validate and confirm the consultant suggested approach and methodology towards the 
fulfillment of th e Terms of Reference. The inception report contains the final version of the 
Plan of action for the experts, schedule and activities. It was an outline initial assessment 
and fact finding of the survey team in relation to the objectives of the survey inclu ding 
sample size and framework, and tools and techniques. In addition, it was included in detail: 
Quality assurance plan, setting up processes for assuring the quality of research; comments 
on research methodology and outcomes of questionnaires and field-test/piloting process. 
 
2.3 Design of the study 
 
• The consultants designed the survey emphasizing on appropriate survey sample frame 
and sampling technique that is statistically sound and acceptable to the client. 
• The survey design included the specific timeline for every activity aiming to complete the 
survey timely. 
• The design also included proper deployment of manpower and systematic monitoring, 
supervision and coordination among all activities so that the activi ties to be completed 
following a critical path -most efficient and effective time use for desirable 
accomplishment. 
• One most important element of the design was finalization of data collection tools - 
questionnaires for respondent survey and data collection checklists for FGD & LG. 
• Prior to the design of the questionnaires and checklists, the consultants finalized a list of 
indicators and measurements of all indicators in detail. 
• The questionnaires and checklists were the techniques to ask questions to get 
measurements of different indicators that are relevant to assess the status of different 
aspects of the farmers and their qualities and quantities. 
• The design also included data collection methodologies -secondary data and primary 
data. The consultants started fieldwork only after approval of the design by the client. 
 
2.4 Sample Design 
 
Two types of analysis were made to gather information about the survey and these are 
quantitative and qualitative. 
 
(i) Quantitative Analysis 
 
For any type of research work representativeness of collected information must be ensured 
so that valid and dependable conclusion can be drawn. The present survey was not 
exclusion. Thus, in order to ensure representativeness of the data and information collected, 
consultants followed probabilistic sampling strategy, which is delineated below. 
 
The population under the survey universe was constituted of farmers in villages of 16 
upazilas in 8 districts of 8 divisions. Thus, it is appropriate to determine a representative 
sample siz e of farmer households at first. Since consultant had information on necessary 
parameters viz. population size and standard deviation, the consultant used the appropriate 
formula fit for Finite Population Correction (FPC) recommended by Daniel (1999) for 
calculating sample size at the district level as given below: 
 
The survey team considered the respondent as the sample unit 
 
 N×p×q×Z2 
n = 
 (N-1)×e2 + Z2×p×q 
 
 
× Design effect

DTCL Page-10 
Where, 
n = sample size 
P = probability of a dichotomous event. Since information regarding project area indicators is 
absence thus we assume that crop production in the project area has increased around 
30%. i.e. p=0.3 
q = 1-P=1-0.3=0.7 
Z = standardized normal variate which is 1 .96 at 5% level of significance with 95% 
confidence interval 
N = population size=30,000 direct beneficiary farmers 
e = relative variation (or relative error) which we assumed for this survey is 4%=0.04 
Design effect = 2 
 
Using the above information, the sample size is determined as approximately as follows for 
each district: 
 
n = (30,000×0.3×0.7×1.962)/{(30,000-1)×0.042+1.962×0.7×0.3}×2 
 
n= 24202.08/48.805×2=495.8921×2~991.78~1000 
 
As per indication of the TOR, there are about 30,000 target direct beneficiary farmers in 64 
districts of 8 divisions. Using a 95% confidence level with 4% margin of error, the consultants 
obtained a representative sample size of farmer households to be n=1000 for this survey. 
 
However, in order to reach such households consultants adopted multistage random 
sampling procedure. At the first stage 8 districts were chosen, two districts from each 
hotspot or climatic problem zone. From these 8 districts , the 16 upazilas were chosen at the 
second stage from each of which a random sample of 2 unions w as selected at the third 
stage. From each of selected union 2 dispersed villages were chosen randomly at t he fourth 
stage. Thus, the sample of 64 villages from 16 upazilas that means 4 villages in each 
upazila. At the fifth stage selected a random sample of farmer households by farm holding 
types. The sample of villages was chosen using Probability Proportiona te Size (PPS) 
identified by the number of the households. However, determined number of households 
was proportionately allotted to chosen upazilas. Allotted number of households at upazila 
levels proportionately allotted to the selected villages. 
 
In order to reach the stipulated farmer households (small, marginal and large including 
women at upazila/village level) a list of farmers was collected from UAO/PMU/PD before the 
survey. The list of different farmers by type of farm holding was aimed at identifyin g the 
targeted population of farmers in the village. Focus was on climate change vulnerability 
consideration, one upazila from eight districts following the climate induced 
problems. The study areas (e.g. District/Upazila/ Union) selection was based on the climatic 
problems and hotspots and expert opinion. Four hotspots considering the climatic and agro -
ecological constrains are: 
 
a. Barind: Drought, Cold Wave, Thunder Storm and Lightening 
b. Coastal area: Coastal flood, Salinity Intrusion and Storm Surge due to cyclone 
c. Haor area: Flash flood 
d. CHT area: Zhum Cultivation and Forest degradation 
 
From this sampling frame , the allotted number of farmer household was randomly chosen 
using Simple Random Sampling (SRS) procedure. In case the required number of farmer 
household was not available in that village, the adjacent village was selected. 
 
Now, for collecting information on some issues like agro -met existing services and service 
providers, weather and climate induced problems on crop planning and crop production , 
existing documents, advisory tools, products and research work relevant to agro -
meteorological services in Bangladesh as well as existing land use pattern, problems 
regarding climatic events in connection with crop production and the knowledge base,

DTCL Page-11 
farmers practiced to solve the challenges etc. some other respondents were involved in the 
survey. 
 
Table 2.1: Summary of Basic Statistics of the Farmers in Project Area2 
 
Type of Hydro 
meteorological 
Extreme ever 
Sample 
Districts 
Sample 
Upazila 
Farm Household by type 
 
Total Large & 
Medium 
7.5 acre 
& above 
Landless 
(no agri-
land) 
Marginal 
(0.05-2.49 
acre) 
Small 
(2.5-7.49 
acre) 
Drought 
Cold wave, 
Storm 
Rajshahi 2 50118 227207 96552 174711 548588 
Naogaon 2 94987 237015 84226 211308 627536 
Cyclone, Salt, 
flood 
Patuakhali 2 46041 69726 73060 94278 283105 
Satkhira 2 39616 137679 54580 157840 389715 
Flash/ Pre -
Monsoon 
Flood 
Sunamganj 2 62121 160540 36761 107838 367260 
Netrokona 2 60688 158775 50595 171368 441426 
Forest 
degradation 
Khagrachari 2 41598 240485 95773 189399 567255 
Bandarban 2 20754 17316 6078 18591 62739 
Total 8 16 415923 1248743 497625 1125333 3287624 
 
Distribution of sample farmer households by districts, upazila and farm holdings 
 
The number of sample farmer was determined by proportional allocation. The allocation was 
said to be proportional allocation when the total sample size 
 (1000) is distributed among 
different districts in proportion to the total number of farmer household of districts. In other 
words, the allocation is proportion if 
for
 1, 2 ......8. 
 
Where 
 is the Population (total number of farmer households by farm holdings) in the 
 th 
district
 is the sample size of 
 th district and 
 is the total number of farm holding in 
respective district. After determinatio n of Sample size in each farm holding, the number of 
household will be further stratified according to their upazila. After determination of farmer 
household by upazila, further stratification was made by farm holdings size (large & medium, 
small, marginal and landless farmers). 
 
 
Table 2.2: Distribution of Sample Farmers by Farm Holdings 
Type of 
Hydro-
meteorologi
cal Extreme 
Event 
Sample 
Districts 
Sample 
Upazila 
Proportionate No of Sample farmers by farm-holding 
 
Total 
Landless 
(without 
agri-land) 
Marginal 
(0.01-0.49 
acre) 
Small 
(0.50-2.49 
acre) 
Large & 
Medium (> 
2.5 acres) 
Propionate 
Adjusted 
Propionate 
Adjusted 
Propionate 
Adjusted 
Propionate 
Adjusted 
Propionate 
Adjusted 
Drought 
Cold wave, 
Storm 
Rajshahi 2 69 70 29 30 53 54 15 16 166 170 
Naogaon 2 72 70 26 26 64 64 29 28 191 188 
Cyclone, 
Salt, Flood 
Patuakhali 2 21 20 22 22 29 28 14 14 86 84 
Satkhira 2 42 40 17 18 48 48 12 12 119 118 
Flash/ Pre- Sunamganj 2 49 50 11 12 33 32 19 20 112 114 
 
2 Year Book of Bangladesh Agricultural Statistics, BBS-2016, Published in May 2017 (Series 28)

DTCL Page-12 
Monsoon 
Flood Netrokona 2 48 46 15 16 52 52 18 18 133 132 
Forest 
Degradation 
Khagrachari 2 73 74 29 30 58 58 13 12 173 174 
Bandarban 2 5 10 2 10 6 10 7 10 20 40 
Total 8 16 379 380 151 164 343 346 127 130 1000 1020 
 
Table 2.3: Upazila-wise sample distribution 
 
Type of Hydro 
meteorological 
Extreme Event 
Sample 
Districts 
Sample 
Upazila 
Distribution of Sample Farmers by Landholdings 
 
Total 
Large & 
Medium 
Landless 
(No agro-
land) 
Marginal 
(0.05-2.49 
acre) 
Small 
(2.5-7.49 
acre) 
Drought 
Cold wave, 
Nor'wester, Pest 
& Disease 
Rajshahi Tanore 8 35 15 27 170 
Godagari 8 35 15 27 
Naogaon Sadar 14 35 13 32 188 
Mohadevpur 14 35 13 32 
Cyclone & storm 
surge, Salinity 
intrusion, Pest & 
Disease 
Patuakhali Kalapara 7 10 11 14 84 
Dumki 7 10 11 14 
Satkhira Kaliganj 6 20 9 24 118 
Debhata 6 20 9 24 
Flash/ 
Pre-Monsoon 
Flood 
Sunamganj Taherpur 10 25 6 16 114 
Sadar 10 25 6 16 
Netrokona Mohanganj 9 23 8 26 132 
Kalmakanda 9 23 8 26 
Forest 
degradation Khagrachari Sadar 6 37 15 29 174 
Matiranga 6 37 15 29 
Bandarban Sadar 5 5 5 5 40 
Lama 5 5 5 5 
Total 8 16 130 380 164 346 1020 
 
The above formula was used as a guide to ensure the representativeness of the sample. 
However, the consultants along with survey team finalized sample size keeping in mind the 
time and budget constraint in consultation with the PD/PIU/DAE officials. Adjusted size of the 
sample was 1020 farmer households, wh ich fits well in the time and budget framework as well 
as in the formula used. 
(ii) Qualitative Analysis 
 
In this analysis the most appropriate methods were used are as follows: 
 
a) Focus Group Discussion (FGD) 
b) Regional Level Data Validation Workshop 
 
a. Focus Group Discussion (FGD) 
 
For the qualitative analysis, total 16 Focus Group Discussion s (FGDs) were conducted 
considering one for each of the upazila. The participants for each FGD were 10 to 12 
respondents. The F GD meetings were conducted with concerned stakeholders such as 
farmers of different types including women at district/ upazila and field level. The FGD was 
conducted to collect the information using pre -designed guidelines ( Appendix-2) 
encompassing issues about the efficiency and effectiveness of project activities such as: 
 
• Weather or climate such as rainfall, temperature, cyclone, storm, drought, cold-wave 
and heat wave, salinity, Zhum cultivation, flood & forest degradation induced 
problems on agriculture 
• Farmer's knowledge and perception on agro-met services at the community level 
• Seasonal variation of climatic and weather parameters (e.g. rainfall, temperature 
etc.) and farmer's perception in relation to crop planning and crop productivity

DTCL Page-13 
• Existing land use pattern, problems regarding climatic events in connection with 
crop production and the knowledge base, farmers are practicing to solve the 
challenges 
• Needs or new requirements of agro-met services in order to ensure and develop 
effective and user friendly agro -met advisory services for ensuring crop productivity 
and food security 
 
b. Regional Level Data Validation Meeting 
 
Five (5) regional level data validation meeting was conducted in Tanore upazila under Rajshahi 
district; Sadar and Mohadevpur upazila under Naogaon district; Sadar upazila of Satkhira 
district and Sadar upazila of Patuakhali district. The regional level meetings were conducted to 
validate the collected information using questionnaire by enumerators of the respective 
sampled upazilas with participation of upazila level officers and target respondents. 
 
c. Upazila Level Agriculture Information 
 
The upazila level basic agricultural information such as rainfall, temperature, land use pattern, 
demography, hydro- meteorology, agricultural practices, current management practices etc. 
was collected from 16 UAOs using pre-designed semi-structured questionnaire (Appendix-3) 
encompassing issues about the indicators such as: 
 
• Past two-year statistics of weather or climate such as rainfall, temperature, cyclone, 
storm, dr ought, cold and heat wave, salinity, Zhum cultivation, flood & forest 
degradation induced problems on agriculture 
• Crop production status of small and marginal farmers and their common problems 
• Agro-met services and products, its functionality, effectiveness and user satisfaction 
• Land use pattern, demography, hydro -meteorology, agricultural practices, and 
current management practices 
• Whether existing climate forecast can address the climate variability ? 
• Recommendations to address weather and climate problems 
 
2.4.1 Summary of the data and information collection is presented below: 
 
Table 2.4: Number and Types of Respondents 
 
Activity Participants/ 
Respondents 
No. of 
Respondents Respondents Category 
A. Quantitative Survey 
A1. Direct 
Interviews with 
Questionnaire 
Direct beneficiary 
farmers 
 
1,020 
Small, marginal and landless 
farmers of the respective 
upazila 
Total 1,020 
A. Qualitative Survey 
B1. FGD Farmers 
16 Small, marginal and landless 
farmers of the respective 
upazila 
B2. Regional Level 
data validation 
workshop 
All categories 
people 

Farmers, DAE, researcher, 
academician, local elites, 
Meteorological official etc. 
B3. District 
/Upazila Level 
Agricultural 
Information 
Upazilla 
Agricultural 
Officer 

UAO, AEO, SAAO etc.

DTCL Page-14 
2.5. Development and Finalization of Questionnaire 
 
The baseline survey questionnaire was prepared based on the objectives and scope of work 
and the needs and indicators for the survey as indicated in the TOR. The questionnaires 
were thoroughly reviewed by the experts at different stages including Inception Report 
Presentation Workshop. Additions and modifications were made during meetings/workshops 
with experts and PMU/DAE authorities. After the final approval of the PD/AMISDP the 
questionnaires were discussed in training session with enumerators and were judged about 
their understanding and field -testing were also conducted. The questionnaire was finalized 
incorporating comments and suggestions of client and field -testing and translated into 
Bangla for data collection. 
 
2.6 Recruitment and Training of Field Staff 
 
Total 18 enumerators having bachelor/master's degree in agriculture were recruited through 
an interview board headed by the Team Leader. A three (03) day training course was 
organized for the data collection team. The first day was devoted to theory, followed by one 
day of practical training in the field for pre-testing and sharing field experiences with each 
other and experts. The third day was for reviewing the field experience. Apart from the 
foundation lectures on how to fill-in the questionnaire, group discussions, role playing in the 
classroom, and ques tion and answer sessions were arranged. The experts and the senior 
key personnel of the firm provided the training. 
 
2.7 Data Collection 
 
The trained survey enumerators and supervisors were placed to collect data in each of the 
survey locations. The survey supervisors were placed for supervising the data collection and 
they were also responsible for monitoring, data checking and field verifi cation of collected 
data. All the field staff reached the survey area with the required number of questionnaires, 
guidelines, checklists, and daily progress reports, manual of data collection, and other 
documents and articles necessary for field activities . The work of enumerators was 
constantly monitored and supervised by the supervisors. The supervisors checked all 
completed questionnaires in the field and re-interviewed some of the respondents to be sure 
about the quality of data. It was done rigorously so as to avoid return visit any particular site, 
to avoid consuming much time. The supervisors were responsible for conducting focus 
group discussions and regional data validation meeting. The consultant made random visits at 
the survey area to ensure quality control of data collection and also to encourage the 
beneficiaries/respondents` and supervisors. 
 
The filled-up questionnaires were checked and verified properly by the Field Supervisors and 
was sent to the DTCL office every weekend right from the second week of the start of the 
survey. In addition to data collection, the consultant conducted visit in the project area to 
evaluate the project activities and knowledge of the DAE officials. 
 
2.8 Quality Assurance Measures of Data 
 
The highest possible care was taken in ensuring a high quality of collected data and 
information. A system of Total Quality Management (TQM) was instituted which comprised 
of all systematic arrangements and activities d irected towards safeguarding, maintenance 
and promotion of quality throughout the study period. To ensure the appropriate quality of 
the collected data/information, quality control was maintained in various steps in this study 
with quantitative and qualita tive research endeavors. Quality was ensured in all the 
indicators, triangulation, analysis and reporting. 
 
A sound quality control system was developed to adequately monitor the quality of data 
collection. For this purpose, experts, supervisors and quali ty enumerators were deployed. 
They moved constantly around the sample spots; and ensure quality data through: (i) field 
checking, and (ii) data monitoring. Field checking was undertaken in both 'presence' and 
'absence' of the field teams. 'Checking in presence' was done through verification of the

DTCL Page-15 
work of a field team in a sample area during the time of the questionnaire survey and 
qualitative studies. 'Checking in absence ' was done through verification of the work of a 
field team in a sample area after the team leaves the site, having completed its assigned 
work in the area. During their field checking, the experts performed re -interviews, and 
checked data accuracy. 'Field checking in presence' was conducted for all field 
enumerators/facilitators, while 'field checking in absence' was done at randomly selected 
sites. 
 
2.9 Data Management, Processing and Analysis 
 
The filled -in questionnaires were considered as the sources of raw data. For effective 
analysis and quality output generation, the following activities were undert aken on the 
collected data: 
 
▪ Filing the filled-in questionnaires and checklists; 
▪ Editing and coding the questionnaires and checklists for entry into the computer; and 
▪ Quality control and coding of open-ended responses. 
 
The filled -in questionnaires and checklists were collected, filed and batched according to 
different strata and task programs to enable easy operation for processing steps (editing, 
coding, entry etc.). The edited and coded questionnaires were dispatched t o computer 
operators for data entry/punching to the software installed (SPSS and MC Access) for this 
purpose. The entire work was undertaken under the supervision and guidance of the team 
leader and computer programmer. 
 
All possible in -built conditional, logical and range checking procedures was incorporated in 
the data entry program to detect mistakes done by the entry operator during the data entry. 
 
Frequency tables were prepared for all the variables and necessary cr oss tables consistent 
with the survey objectives were prepared. 
 
Analysis Plan 
 
For making a sensible analysis of collected data following statistical tools was adopted 
 
▪ Descriptive summary statistics 
▪ Graphical representation 
▪ Confidence Intervals for crucial variables 
▪ Analyze weather & climate induced problems on agricultural production 
▪ Inter-regional difference analysis 
▪ Differential analysis by small, marginal and landless, farm holdings, by gender. 
 
The specific analysis included: 
• Socio-demographic profile including the family composition by age & sex, education, 
occupation 
• Landownership status 
• Land use scenario s such as area, cropping pattern and intensity, cropping plan on 
climate changes and its knowledge 
• Cyclone, cold and heat wave, storm, flood, temperature, rainfall, salinity, zhum 
cultivation, flood, lightening related common problems on agricultural production. 
• Crop production, productivity, and diversity etc.

DTCL Page-16 
CHAPTER- 3 
 
FARMER'S BASIC INFORMATION 
 
This chapter describes about the farmers demographic information such as family, 
ownership of land, land use pattern and production and productivity etc. The objective of the 
study was to identify land use pattern, demography, hydro -meteorology, agricultural 
practices, current management practices etc. of farmers . As per the objectives, findings of 
the study have been presented herewith mainly based on the primary and secondary data. 
 
3.1 General information of the farmer 
 
Gender, m arital status, education level, major source of income and number of family 
members were determined by analyzing questionnaires as follows: 
 
3.1.1 Gender and marital status of respondents 
 
Out of 1020 farmers , around all ( 98.9%) of them were male and 1.1% farmers (11) were 
female participated in the survey. In terms of marital status, 96.5% of the farmers (984) were 
married, 2.4% farmers (25) were unmarried, 0.9% farmers (9) were widow and 0.2% farmers 
(2) were divorce. 
 
Table 3.1 Marital status of the respondents 
 
Marital status Response of famer's 
No % 
Married 984 96.5 
Unmarried 25 2.5 
Divorce 2 0.2 
Widow 9 0.9 
Total 1020 100 
 
3.1.2 Education level of respondents 
 
Out of 1020 farmers, 27.5% of them (281) had no formal education, 25.1% farmers (256) 
had secondary school education, 20.4% farmers (208) had primary school education. On the 
other hand, 13.6% farmers (139) could read and write only, 10.4% farmers (106) had college 
level education, 2.3% farmers (23) had university level education and 0.7% farmers ( 7) had 
technical education. 
 
Table 3.2: Education level of respondents 
 
Education Level Number of respondents % response 
No formal education 281 27.5 
Can read and write 139 13.6 
Primary school 208 20.4 
Secondary school 256 25.1 
Technical education 7 0.7 
College 106 10.4 
University 23 2.3 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
3.1.3 Major sources of income 
 
All (100%) farmers stated that the ir major source of income came from the agricultural 
activities/farmland while 17% farmers reported that in addition of agricultural farmland 
income, they ha d an additional source of income from the non -agricultural activities /non-
farmland.

DTCL Page-17 
 
 
Figure 3.1. Major source of farmers' income 
 
3.1.4 Members of the family and engaged with agriculture 
 
Number of members in the family: The average number of the family members 
participated in the survey was 5.36, where the minimum members were 2 and maximum 
family members were 17. 
Number of family members engaged in agriculture: The average family members 
engaged in agriculture was 1.56, where the minimum members engaged in agriculture were 
1 and maximum family members were 9. 
 
Table 3.3. Number of members in the family and engaged with agriculture 
Family parameters Member range (no./family) Standard 
deviation Minimum Maximum Average 
Member in the family (no.) 2 17 5.36 2.429 
Family members engaged 
in agriculture (no.) 
1 9 1.56 0.953 
 
3.1.5 Owner of the lands 
 
Total land of the household: The average total land area of the household was 242.17 
decimal/household, whereas the minimum area of total land of the household was 5 
decimals and the maximum area of the total land of the household was 960 decimals. 
 
Own land: The average own land of the household was 200.34 decimal/household, whereas 
the minimum own land of the household was 2 decimals and the maximum own land of the 
household was 960 decimals. 
 
Lease/mortgage land: The average lease/mortgage land of the househo ld was 49.12 
decimal/household, whereas the minimum lease/mortgage land of the household was 4 
decimals and the maximum lease/mortgage land of the household was 90 decimals. 
 
Total cultivable land of the household: The average total cultivable land of the household 
was 239.89 decimal/household, whereas the minimum total cultivable land of the household 
was 4 decimals and the maximum total cultivable land of the household was 980 decimals. 

16.6

No %
Response
Type of response
Farm land
Other than farm land

DTCL Page-18 
Own cultivable land: The average own cultivable land of the household was 218.16 
decimal/household, whereas the minimum own cultivable land of the household was 4 
decimals and the maximum cultivable own land of the household was 980 decimals. 
 
Lease/mortgage cultivable land: The average lease/mortgage cultivable land of the 
household was 41.24 decimal/household, whereas the minimum lease/mortgage cultivable 
land of the household was 3 decimals and the maximum lease/mortgage cultivable land of 
the household was 90 decimals. 
 
Table 3.4. Land area under the household 
Land pattern Area of land (decimal/family) Standard 
deviation Minimum Maximum Average 
Total land of the household 5 960 242.17 207.110 
Own land 2 960 200.34 225.482 
Lease /mortgage land 4 90 49.12 36.371 
Total cultivable land of the 
household 
4 980 239.89 217.198 
Own cultivable land 4 980 218.16 199.024 
Leased/mortgage cultivable land 3 90 41.24 34.679 
 
3.1.6 Soil type of the land under the household 
 
Out of 1020 farmers participated in the survey, the soil type of the land of 47.1% (480) 
farmers was loamy which was considered ideal soil for agricultural crop production. Whereas 
31.8% farmers (324) had sandy-loam soil land. On the other hand, 8.7% (89) farmers had 
clay soil land, 7.3% farmers had clay -loam soil land and only 5.2% farmers had sandy soil 
land. 
Table 3.5: Soil type of the land under the household 
Soil type Number of respondents % response 
Sandy and Salty 53 5.2 
Loamy 480 47.1 
Clay 89 8.7 
Sandy-loam and Saline 324 31.8 
Clay-loam 74 7.3 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
 
3.1.7 Land type of the farmers 
 
Land type data indicates that out of 1020 farmers, 34% of them (344) had high land, 35% 
farmers (355) had medium high lands. Therefore, 69% of respondents had high and medium 
high lands and they could practice year-round crop production. On the other hand, 24.1% 
farmers (246) had low land, 6.8% farmers had marshland and only 0.6% farmers (6) had 
pond. Therefore, 31% farmers had low and marshland and pond, which were not suitable for 
year-round crop production. 
 
Table 3.6: Land type of the farmers 
 
Land type Number of respondents % response 
High 344 33.7 
Low 246 24.1 
Medium high 355 34.8 
Marsh land 69 6.8 
Pond 6 0.6 
Total 1020 100.0

DTCL Page-19 
3.1.8 Utilization of irrigation on land 
 
Out of 1020, about 90.6% farmers (924) participated in the survey utilized irrigation on their 
agricultural land for crop production . On the other hand, other 9.4% (96) farmers reported 
that they did not use irrigation on their land for crop production. 
 
 
 
 
Per hectare average production in irrigated agricultural land is 7.0 MT and per hectare 
average income is Taka 182,000 in the project sample area. 
 
90.6%
9.4%
Figure 3.2. Response on the utilization of irrigation on agricultural 
land by the farmers
Yes No

DTCL Page-20 
CHAPTER-4 
 
WEATHER AND CLIMATE INDUCED PROBLEMS 
 
 
This chapter describes overall weather and climate induced problems faced by the farmers 
for crop production, their losses and overall impact of the farmer's livelihood etc. The 
objective of the study was to identify what type of agro-meteorological services available in 
Bangladesh and who are the service providers and existing agro -meteorological (if any) 
information, ongoing observed parameters and technologies of BMD. In addition, assess 
the farmer's knowledge and perception on meteorological or agro-met services at 
community level and the seasonal variation of climatic and weather parameters (e.g. 
rainfall, temperature etc.) and farmer's perception in relation to crop planning and crop 
productivity. The study also assesses the effectiveness of existing forecast information and 
future requirements. As per the objectives, findings o f the study have been presented 
herewith mainly based on the primary and secondary data. 
 
4.1 Upazila-wise past two years' weather and climate information 
 
The intensity of weather and climate induced problems in 16 upazilas of the 8 sampled 
districts under four hydro meteorological Extreme Region/hotspots areas are varied from one 
location to another. However, the major temperature variation, annual rainfall, c yclone, 
sudden flood, drought, and storm related information have been furnished below: 
 
Minimum Temperature: The lowest 4.90C temperature recorded in Sadar and Mohadebpur 
upazila under Naogaon district which was followed by S adar upazilas under Rajshahi 
(5.80C), Khagrachari (5.10C), Netrokona (6.20C), and Satkhira (7.5 0C). However, the highest 
temperature recorded in Bandarban (11.5 0C) followed by Patuakhali (9.50C) and Sunamganj 
(8.80C). 
 
Maximum Temperature: Similar trend of temperature variation had also recorded in case of 
maximum temperature. The highest 350C temperature recorded in Tanore and G odagari 
upazila under Rajshahi district which was followed by Satkhira (34 0C), Naogaon and 
Sunamganj (33 0C), Patuakhali (320C). However , the lowest temperature recorded in 
Bandarban and Khagrachari (260C) while average temperature was ranged between 220C-
300C. 
 
Annual rainfall: The lowest 1075 and 1112 mm rainfall recorded in Tanore and Godagari of 
Rajshahi district which was followed by S adar and Matiranga upazilas under Khagrachari 
(1224 and 1550 mm), Naogaon (1552 mm), Satkhira (1711 mm) while highest 2800 mm 
recorded in Taher pur of Sunamganj, which was followed by Kalapara of Pataukhali 
(2690mm) Kalmakanda of Netrokona (2460 mm), Bandarban (2300 mm) etc. 
 
Cyclone: Highest 4- and 3-times cyclone recorded in Kalapara and Dumki of Patukhali while 
2 times in Kaliganj upazila of Satkhira, Matiranga upazila of Khagrachari and 1 time in 
Tanore, Sunanganj S adar and lama upazila of Bandarban etc. There was no record about 
cyclone in the other upazilas in past two years. 
 
Flash Flood: All upazilas of the sample areas were affected due to flash flood . Highest 3 
times flash cy clone recorded in Kalapara and D umki of Patukhali while 2 times in Kaliganj 
upazila of Satkhira, Matiranga upazila of Khagrachari and 1 time in Tanore, Sunanganj 
Sadar and Lama upazila of Bandarban etc. There was no record about cyclone in the other 
upazilas in past two years. 
 
Drought: The Tanore upazila of Rajshahi district was recorded drought in the past two years 
while mild drought recorded in Patuakhali and Khagrachari districts in rabi season. There 
was no record of drought in other districts in the past two years.

DTCL Page-21 
Storm: Highest 12 times storms observed in S unamganj Sadar, which was followed Tanore 
of Rajshahi and Taherpur of Sunamganj (9), Kalapara of Patuakhali (8), Kaliganj of Satkhira 
(5). However, the lowest (1) number of storm recorded in Naogaon, Debhata of Satkhira, 
Matiranga of Khagrachari, which was followed by Netrokona (2). Almost all upazila storms 
were recorded except Bandarban and Khagrachari Sadar, Mohanganj of Netrokona. 
 
Table 4.1: Upazila-wise-past two years weather and climate information 
 
District Upazila Minimum Maximum Average 
Temp.(0C) 
Annual 
Rainfall 
(mm) 
Cyclone Flash 
flood 
Drought Storm 
Rajshahi Tanore 5.8 0C 35 0C 280C 1112 1 1 Present 9 
Godagari 5.80C 350C 28 0C 1075 - 1 Absent 2 
Naogaon Sadar 4.9 0C 330C 22 0C 1552 - 1 - 2 
Mohadebpur 4.9 0C 330C 200C 1811 - 1 1 
Patuakhali Kalapara 9.5 0C 320C 250C 2609 4 times 2 times Mild 
Drought 
in Rabi 
Season 

Dumki 9.5 0C 320C 270C 2490 3 times 2 times Mild 
Drought 
in Rabi 
Season 

Satkhira Kaliganj 7.5 0C 340C 290C 1800 2 times 3 times 5 
 Debhata 7.50C 340C 250C 1711 2 times 1 
Sunamganj Taherpur 8.80C 330C 270C 2800 - 1 time - 9 
Sadar 8.80C 330C 280C 2200 1 1 time - 12 
Netrokona Mohanganj 6.20C 320C 300C 1800 1 time - 
Kalmakanda 6.20C 320C 260C 2460 - 1 time 2 
Khagrachari Sadar 6.10C 320C 300C 1550 - 2 times Kharif -2 
Season 
- 
Matiranga 6.10C 260C 260C 1224 2 2 Mild 
Drought 

Bandarban Sadar 11.50C 260C 220C 2300 - 1 - - 
Lama 11.50C 260C 250C 2200 1 3 - - 
Source: UAO-DAE 2017-18 
 
4.2 Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-1 (Aus) for crop production 
 
Basically, the intensity of weather and climate induced problems on crop production are 
varied from one location to another. However, the major and minor problems in Kharif -1 
(Aus) season (16 March to 15 July of the year) for crop production have been illustrated as 
follows: 
 
Major problems in Kharif -1 season: Out of 1020 respondents, the majority (62.64%) 
farmers stated that insect pest s attack in crop fields were the major problems in Kharif -1 
(Aus) season for crop production which was followed by disease (51.7%) and weed 
infestation (27.3%). In case of climate related problems, the highest (20.9%) farmers 
indicated that salinity was the major problems for Kharif-1 season for crop production which 
was followed by drought (15.5%), Nor'wester (10.49%), flash flood (10.3%), heat wave 
(8.6%), flood (7%), cold wave (5.8%) and lightening (5%) . However, the lowest (0.2%) 
percent farmers stated that they had a major problem of landslide which was fol lowed by

DTCL Page-22 
flood inundate (1.6%), cyclone (2%), storm surge (2.3%), and forest degradation (3.6%) 
under multiple responses. 
 
Minor problems in Kharif-1 season: Out of 1020 respondents, 10 to 25% farmers reported 
that the attack of insect and mite pests, dis eases on crops, rats in crop field, weed 
infestation were the minor problems for crop production in Kharif -1 season. In case of 
climate related problems, 10 % to 14% farmers of the survey area reported that the flood, 
flash flood, storm surge were the minor problems. On the other hand, 4 % to 5% farmers 
reported that the drought, thunderstorm, cyclone, forest degradation, etc. were the minor 
problems. 
 
Table 4.2: Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-1 (Aus) season 
 
Problems 
Major problem Minor problem 
Number of 
respondents 
% 
response 
Number of 
respondents % response 
Climate related problems 
Drought 158 15.5 45 4.4 
Cold-wave 59 5.8 15 1.5 
Heatwave 88 8.6 23 2.3 
Nor 'wester 107 10.49 47 4.6 
Lightening 51 5.0 17 1.7 
Coastal flood 50 4.9 19 1.9 
Flood 71 7.0 15 1.5 
Flash Flood 105 10.3 103 10.1 
Flood Inundate 16 1.6 35 3.4 
Salinity 213 20.9 142 13.9 
Storm surge 23 2.3 120 11.8 
Cyclone 20 2.0 54 5.3 
Landslide 2 0.2 21 2.1 
Forest degradation 37 3.6 43 4.2 
Pest related problems 
Attack of insect pests 639 62.64 259 25.4 
Attack of diseases 527 51.7 154 15.1 
Weed infestation 278 27.3 106 10.4 
Multiple Responses 2444 1218 
 
4.3 Weather and climate induced problems in Kharif-2 (Aman) for crop production 
 
Basically, the intensity of weather and climate induced problems on crop production are 
varied from one location to another. However, the major and minor problems in Kharif -2 
(Aman) season (16 July to 15 October of the year) for crop production have been illustrated 
as follows: 
 
 
Major problems in Kharif -2 season: Out of 1020 respondents, the majority (51.17%) 
farmers stated that insect pests attack in crop fields were the major problems in Kharif -2 
(Aman) season for crop production which was followed by disease (32.84%) and weed 
infestation (18.7%). In case of climate related problems, the highest (14.5%) farmers 
indicated that flood was the major problems for Kharif-2 season for crop production which 
was followed by flood inundate (10.7%), salinity (9.7%), flash flood (8.1%), storm surge 
(6.9%) and nor'wester (4.7%). However, the lowest (0.4%) percent farmers stated that they 
had a major problem of forest degradation which was followed by landslide (1.1%), 
lightening (2.1%), cold wave (3.4%), cyclone (3.6% and drought (4%). 
 
 
Minor problems in Kharif-2 season: In terms of weather and climate related problems, o ut 
of 1020 respondents, drought, cold wave, heat wave, lightening, cyclone, forest degradation, 
etc. were the minor problems in Kharif-2 season for crop production.

DTCL Page-23 
Table 4.3: Weather and Climate induced problems in Kharif-2 (Aman) season 
 
Problem 
Major problem Minor problem 
Number of 
respondents % response Number of 
respondents 
% 
response 
Climate related problems 
Drought 41 4.0 24 2.4 
Cold-wave 35 3.4 11 1.1 
Heatwave 41 4.0 11 1.1 
Nor'wester 48 4.7 17 1.7 
Lightening 21 2.1 15 1.5 
Coastal flood 75 7.4 21 2.1 
Flood 148 14.5 27 2.6 
Flash Flood 83 8.1 35 3.4 
Flood Inundate 109 10.7 19 1.9 
Salinity 99 9.7 84 8.2 
Storm surge 70 6.9 23 2.3 
Cyclone 37 3.6 19 1.9 
Landslide 11 1.1 3 0.3 
Forest degradation 4 0.4 3 0.3 
Pest related problems 
Attack of insect pests 422 51.17 168 16.5 
Attack of diseases 335 32.84 268 26.3 
Weed infestation 191 18.7 194 2.4 
Multiple responses 1770 942 
 
4.4 Weather and climate induced problems in Rabi (Boro) for crop production 
 
Basically, the intensity of weather and climate induced problems on crop production are 
varied from one location to another. However, the major and minor problems in Rabi (Boro) 
season (16 October to 15 March of the year) for crop production have been illu strated as 
follows: 
 
Major problems in Rabi (Boro) season: The major problem of crop production in Rabi 
(Boro) season was the drought as reported by the 28.1% respondents, followed by attack of 
insect pest (27.25%), cold wave (22.1%), attack of disease (16.4%), weed infestation (7.1%), 
salinity (6.3%) and flash flood (4.7%). However, none of the response re ported in the 
category of flood, heat wave, flood inundate, and landslide while 1.2% farmers indicated that 
the forest degradation was the major problem which was followed by nor'wester (0.8%), 
storm surge (0.5%), cyclone (0.4%), lightening (0.2%), and coastal flood (0.1%). 
 
Minor problems in Rabi (Boro) season: In terms of weather and climate related problems, 
out of 1020 respondents, heat wave, all kinds of floods, storms and cyclone etc. were the 
minor problems in Rabi (Boro) season for crop production. 
 
Table 4.4: Weather and climate induced problems in Rabi (Boro) season 
 
Problem Major problem Minor problem 
Number of 
respondents 
% response Number of 
respondents 
% response 
Drought 287 28.1 9 0.9 
Cold-wave 225 22.1 5 0.5 
Heatwave 0 0.0 35 3.4 
Nor 'wester 8 0.8 36 3.5 
Lightening 2 0.2 56 5.5 
Coastal flood 1 0.1 45 4.4 
Flood 0 0.0 51 5.0

DTCL Page-24 
Flash Flood 48 4.7 42 4.1 
Flood Inundate 0 0.0 40 3.9 
Salinity 64 6.3 39 3.8 
Storm surge 5 0.5 2 0.2 
Cyclone 4 0.4 12 1.2 
Landslide 0 0.0 2 0.2 
Forest degradation 12 1.2 2 0.2 
Attack of insect pests 278 27.25 283 27.7 
Attack of diseases 167 16.4 183 17.9 
Weed infestation 72 7.1 129 12.6 
Multiple Responses 1231 1083 
 
From above findings , it was revealed that attack of insect pests was the single most major 
problem in Kharif-1, Kharif-2 and Boro seasons for crop production in the survey area which 
was followed by diseases. Other major problem s were flash flood/ flood especially in Aman 
and Boro seasons. The salinity problem s in Rabi and Kharif -1 season were occurred in 
coastal areas. 
 
4.5 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of Drought, Cold wave, 
Nor 'wester, Pest & Disease 
 
District-wise response of farmers under hydro meteorological extreme event/hotspots area of 
drought, cold wave, nor 'wester , pest & disease regarding weather and climate induced 
problems had been furnished below: 
 
Rajshahi: Highest 65.29% farmers indicated that they had a pest infestation problem while 
53.53% farmers opined that they had a diseases infestation problem in the crop field . This 
was followed by drought ( 32.94%), cold -wave ( 24.71%), heat wave ( 27.06%), storm 
(13.53%), and cyclone (11.76%). The lowest 5.29% farmers opined that they had a problem 
of lightening which was followed by nor 'wester (9.41%). None of the farmers reported about 
the problems of floods, landslide, forest degradation and salinity problems in Rajshahi 
district. 
 
Naogaon: Similar to the Rajshahi, the highest 67.86% farmers indicated that they had a pest 
infestation problem while 56.38% farmers opined that they had a diseases infestation 
problem in their crop field . This was followed by drought ( 37.77%), cold -wave ( 32.98%), 
heatwave (27.13%), cyclone (11.70%), and nor 'wester (11.17%). The lowest 6.91% farmers 
opined that they had a problem of lightening which was followed by storm surge (9.57%). 
 
Table 4.5: Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of Drought, Cold- 
wave, nor 'wester, Pest & Disease 
 
Type of problems Rajshahi farmer's response Naogaon farmer's response 
Number (N=170) % response Number (N=188) % response 
Drought 56 32.94 71 37.77 
Cold-wave 42 24.71 62 32.98 
Heatwave 46 27.06 51 27.13 
nor 'wester 16 9.41 21 11.17 
Lightening 9 5.29 13 6.91 
Coastal flood - - 
Flood - - 
Flash Flood - - 
Flood Inundate - - 
Salinity - - 
Storm surge 23 13.53 18 9.57 
Cyclone 20 11.76 22 11.70

DTCL Page-25 
Landslide - - 
Forest degradation - - 
Pest infestation 111 65.29 126 67.02 
Disease infestation 91 53.53 106 56.38 
Multiple responses 414 490 
 
4.6 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of cyclone & storm surge, 
salinity intrusion, pest & disease 
 
District-wise response of farmers under hydro meteorological extreme event/hotspots area of 
cyclone & storm surge, salinity intrusion, pest & disease regarding weather and climate 
induced problems had been furnished below: 
 
Patuakhali: Highest 66.67% farmers indicated that they had a pest infestation problems and 
salinity while 60.71% farmers opined that they had a diseases infestation problem in the crop 
field. This was followed by salinity (42.86%), storm-surge (32.14%), cyclone and coastal 
flood (30.95%), flash flood (28.57%), flood (25%), and flood inundate (21.43%) . However, 
the lowest 10.71% farmers opined that they had a problem of forest degradation which was 
followed by heatwave (17.86%), nor' wester (15.48%) and lightening (9.52%). 
 
Satkhira: Similar to the Patuakhali, the highest 58.47% farmers indicated that they had a 
pest infestation problems and salinity while 51.69% farmers opined that they had a diseases 
infestation problem in their crop field. This was followed by salinity problems (39.83%), flood 
(33.05%), coastal flood (30.51%), flash flood (27.97%), cyclone (22.88%) and flood inundate 
(22.03%). Conversely, t he lowest 9.32% farmers opined that they had a problem of forest 
degradation which was followed by storm-surge (19.49%), nor 'wester (13.56%), and heat 
wave (12.71%). 
 
Table 4.6: Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of cyclone & storm 
surge, salinity intrusion, pest & disease 
 
Type of problems Patuakhali farmer's response Satkhira farmer's response 
Number (N=84) % response Number (N=118) % response 
Drought 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Cold-wave 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Heatwave 15 17.86 15 12.71 
Nor 'wester 13 15.48 16 13.56 
Lightening 8 9.52 10 8.47 
Coastal flood 26 30.95 36 30.51 
Flood 21 25.00 39 33.05 
Flash Flood 24 28.57 33 27.97 
Flood Inundate 18 21.43 26 22.03 
Salinity 36 42.86 47 39.83 
Storm surge 27 32.14 23 19.49 
Cyclone 26 30.95 27 22.88 
Landslide 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Forest degradation 9 10.71 11 9.32 
Pest infestation 56 66.67 69 58.47 
Disease infestation 51 60.71 61 51.69 
Multiple responses 330 413

DTCL Page-26 
4.7 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of flash/ pre-monsoon 
flood 
 
District-wise response of farmers under hydro meteorological extreme event/hotspots area of 
flash/pre-monsoon flood regarding weather and climate induced problems ha d been 
furnished below: 
 
Sunamganj: Around 59.65% farmers indicated that they had a pest infestation problem in 
the crop field which was followed by flood (53.51%), disease infestation (49.12%), flash flood 
(44.74%), flood inundate (42.98%), and cyclone (34.21%). However , the lowest (9.65% 
farmers infor med that they had lightening problems which were followed by cold -wave 
(13.16%), nor 'wester (14.04%), and storm surge (20.18%). 
 
Netrokona: More than fifty percent (56.06%) farmers indicated that they had a pest 
infestation problem which was followed by disease infestation (46.97%), flash flood 
(29.55%), flood (26.52%), and flood inundate (23.48%). However , the lowest 8.33% farmers 
opined that they had a problem of lightening which was followed by nor'wester and cyclone 
(12.12%) and storm-surge (15.91%). 
 
Table 4.7: Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of Flash/ Pre-
Monsoon Flood 
Type of problems Sunamganj farmer's response Netrokona farmer's response 
Number 
(N=114) 
% response Number (N=132) % response 
Drought 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Cold-wave 15 13.16 11 8.33 
Heatwave 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Nor 'wester 16 14.04 16 12.12 
Lightening 11 9.65 11 8.33 
Coastal flood 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Flood 61 53.51 35 26.52 
Flash Flood 51 44.74 39 29.55 
Flood Inundate 49 42.98 31 23.48 
Salinity 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Storm surge 23 20.18 21 15.91 
Cyclone 39 34.21 16 12.12 
Landslide 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Forest degradation 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Pest infestation 68 59.65 74 56.06 
Disease infestation 56 49.12 62 46.97 
Multiple responses 389 316 
 
4.8 Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of forest degradation 
 
District-wise response of farmers under hydro -meteorological extreme event/hotspot area of 
forest degradation regarding weather and climate induced problems ha d been furnished 
below: 
 
Khagrachari: Less than fifty percent (43.68%) farmers indicated that they had a pest 
infestation problem while 40.80% farmers opined that they had a forest degradation problem. 
This was followed by flood (39.08%) and disease infestation (36.21%). 
 
Bandarban: Similar trend of result ha d also found in Band arban. Highest 72.50% farmers 
indicated that they had a pest infestation problem while 67.50% farmers opined that they had

DTCL Page-27 
a forest degradation problem. This was followed by flash flood ( disease infestation flash 
flood (62.50%), and disease infestation (57.50) %. 
 
Table 4.8: Weather and climate induced problems in hotspots area of forest 
degradation 
 
Type of problems Khagrachari farmer's response Bandarban farmer's response 
Number (N=174) % response Number (N=40) % response 
Drought 0 0.00 1 2.50 
Cold-wave 11 6.32 1 2.50 
Heatwave 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Nor 'wester 6 3.45 2 5.00 
Lightening 6 3.45 0 0.00 
Coastal flood 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Flood 68 39.08 19 47.50 
Flash Flood 46 26.44 25 62.50 
Flood Inundate 48 27.59 14 35.00 
Salinity 0 0.00 0 0.00 
Storm surge 21 12.07 7 17.50 
Cyclone 11 6.32 2 5.00 
Landslide 39 22.41 15 37.50 
Forest degradation 71 40.80 27 67.50 
Pest infestation 76 43.68 29 72.50 
Disease infestation 63 36.21 23 57.50 
Multiple responses 466 165 
 
4.9 Extent of crop damages due to the weather and climatic problems 
 
Out of 1020 respondents, about 48 .1% (491) farmers reported that the extent of crop 
damages due to weather and climatic problems was moderate which is followed by severe 
crop damage as reported by about 3 5.6% farmers (363) during survey. On the other hand, 
about 16.3% (166) farmers reported that the extent of crop damage was negligible due to 
weather and climatic problems. 
 
From these findings, it was revealed that the extent of crop damage due to weather and 
climatic problems was moderate to severe as reported by about 84% farmers. Therefo re, 
early forecast of weather and climate services for the farmers will be very effective to protect 
their crops from the damages. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1: Extent of crop damages due to weather and climate related problems

DTCL Page-28 
4.10 Frequency of weather and climate related problems 
 
Out of 1020 respondents, about 95% farmers (967) reported that they faced weather and 
climatic problems at least 1 to 4 times during crop production; of which 48.4% farmers faced 
problems at 3-4 times and 46.4% farmers faced probl ems at 1-2 times. On the other hand, 
about 5% (50) farmers faced such type of problems at 5-6 times during crop production. 
 
Considering the frequency of weather and climatic problems faced by the farmers during 
crop production, early forecasting of agro -meteorological information will be the most 
effective way to take actions to combat crop damage due to weather and climatic problems. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2: Frequency of weather and climatic problems faced during crop production 
 
4.11 Problems faced during 2016 and 2017 
 
Table below indicated the past two years (2016 and 2017) weather and climate induced 
problems faced by the farmers. Majority (70.1%) farmers reported that insect attack was the 
major problems for producing crops follow ed by attack of disease (60.9%), flash flood 
(36.2%), weed infestation on crop field (34.1%), drought (22.4%) cold-wave (21.8%) and nor 
'wester/thunderstorm ( 10.39%). However , the lowest ((0.6%) farmers indicated forest 
degradation were the major problems followed by landslide (1.2%), coastal flood (1.9%), 
storm surge (3.9%), lightening (7.05%), cyclone (8.4%), flood (9.3%), flood inundate (9.4%), 
and heatwave (9.5%). 
 
To over come from the huge damage of crops, i t is strongly recommended immediate 
availability of agro-meteorological service to the farmers for reducing the crops damage from 
the climate and weather induced problems. 
 
Table 4.9: Problems faced during 2016 and 2017 
 
Problems faced in past 2 years 
(2016 and 2017) Number % 
Drought 219 22.4 
Cold-wave 213 21.8 
Heatwave 93 9.5 
Thunder storm 106 10.39 
Lightening 32 7.05 
473 494

46.4 48.4
4.9 0.3

1-2 times 3-4 times 5-6 times Never
No.
 %

DTCL Page-29 
Coastal flood 19 1.9 
Flood 91 9.3 
Flash Flood 353 36.2 
Flood Inundate 92 9.4 
Salinity 191 19.6 
Storm surge 38 3.9 
Cyclone 82 8.4 
Landslide 12 1.2 
Forest degradation 6 0.6 
Attack of insect 684 70.1 
Attack of diseases 594 60.9 
Weed infestation 333 34.1 
Others 21 2.2 
Multiple Responses 3219 
 
4.12 Average production loss 
 
According to the figure 4.3, the extent of problems faced by the farmers were insect attack, 
disease attack, flash flood, weed infestation on crop field, drought, cold -wave and 
thunderstorm. The highest (39.9%) farmers reported th at they had a loss of 20 -39 kg per 
acre (100 decimal) land which is followed by above 100 kg in per acre (100 decimal) land. 
The lowest (6.5%) farmers opined that they had a loss of 80-100 kg in per acre land which is 
followed by 60-79 kg (8.8%), 41-59 kg (12.1%) and above 100 kg (32.7%). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3: Average production loss due to problems

DTCL Page-30 
CHAPTER-5 
 
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL RELATED INFORMATION 
 
This chapter describes overall weather and climate related information available for farmers. 
The objective of the study was to identify existing agro -meteorological information, ongoing 
observed parameters and technologies of BMD and t o assess the farmer's knowledge and 
perception on agro-met services (if available) at community level. As per the objectives, 
findings of the study have been presented herewith mainly based on the primary and 
secondary data. 
 
5.1 Source of Agro-Meteorological Information 
 
There was no agro-meteorological service for farmers in the country. Farmers were getting 
forecast information on meteorological matters such as rain, storm, cyclone, heat wave, cold 
wave, thunderstorm etc. through different sources. Majority (42.74%) farmers reported that 
they did not get any meteorological information while second highest (37.15%) farmers 
received meteorological information from the TV which was followed by DAE (30.39%), 
community people (30%) and radio (25.6%). However, the lowest (0.2%) farmers indicated 
that they received information from the other sources like DAE IPM club/extension battayan 
club which was followed by local level micing (8%), and mobile SMS (9.4%). Aside this 
around 2.15% farmers indicated tha t they received meteorological information from the 
social media. 
 
Table 5.1: Meteorological related information in the project area 
 
Source of getting information of weather, 
climate, rainfall and flood etc. 
Multiple responses 
Number % 
Radio 260 25.6 
TV 379 37.15 
Social media 22 2.15 
Mobile SMS 95 9.4 
Local level miking 81 8.0 
Community people 305 30.0 
None 436 42.74 
DAE 310 30.39 
Multiple responses 1680 
 
5.2 Perception about the Govt. organization provid ing weather & climate related 
information 
 
Asking the question on knowledge about the name of government organizations that 
provided temperature, rainfall, cyclone, storm, heat wave, and cold wave information , the 
majority (56%) farmer reported that they didn't have any knowledge about the organization 
that provided this information . The second highest ( 25%) farmer indicated that they were 
getting this information from the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) field level 
officials and extension batayan /IPM club etc. Conversely, 1 9% farmers indicated that they 
are getting weather and climate related information from Bangladesh Meteorological 
Department (BMD) through radio, TV or local level miking. However, none of them reported 
about BWDB.

DTCL Page-31 
 
 
Figure 5.1: Knowledge about the organization providing weather & climate information 
 
 
5.3 Perception about the govt. organization providing flood related information 
 
Asking the question on knowledge about the organizations providing flood, flash flood, and 
coastal flood related information, the majority (58.73%) farmer reported that they didn't have 
any know ledge about the organization who was providing flood related information while 
25.10% farmers indicated that they were getting these flood related information from the 
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) field level officials and extension batayan/IPM 
club etc. The lowest (1.37%) farmer indicated that they were getting this information from the 
Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) local level officials which were followed by 
Bangladesh Water Development Board (14.80%). The above findings clearly indicated that 
farmers didn't have a clear idea about the government agency who was providing flood 
related information. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2: Knowledge about the organization providing flood information 
 
5.4 Timing of information to save crops and properties from the damages 
 
Most (86.6%) of the farmers indicated that they were not getting enough time after receiving 
information to save crops from the damage. Even they were not quite enough sure what to 
do after getting this information as it was only information of weather not any services or 
advise which was required for farmers to save crop from the damages. However, only 13.4%

DTCL Page-32 
farmers opined that they were getting enough time after getting information to save crop 
from the damages. 

13.4

86.6
1 2
Yes No
 
Figure 5.3: Timing of information to save crops and properties from the damages 
 
5.5 Minimum advance forecast time 
 
Majority ( 54.6%) farmers reported that they need at least 7 days' advance forecast 
information of weather and climate with advisories or services to save their crops from the 
damage which is followed by 15 days (29.3%). However, the lowest (1.5%) farmers reported 
that they need at more than 15 days' advance forecast information of weather and climate 
with advisories or services to save their crops from the damage which is followed by 3 days 
(14.6%). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4: Minimum advance forecast time required to save crop from the damages 
 
5.6 Knowledge about Role of BMD 
 
Majority ( 80.78%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the r oles of BMD 
whether it provided any services or advisories for protecting farmers' crops from the hazards 
like drought, high temperature, cold & heat wave, storms, cyclone and related calamities. 
Though only 19.22% farmers indicated that they had a little bit knowledge about the roles of 
BMD which was only provide d meteorological information like tempe rature, rainfall and 
cyclone information but not any agro -met services or advisories for protecting farmers from

DTCL Page-33 
the hazards like drought, high temperature, cold & heat wave, storms, cyclone and related 
calamities 

1 2

19.22%

80.78%
Yes No
 
Figure 5.4: Perception about Roles of BMD 
 
 
5.7 Knowledge about Role of BWDB 
 
Majority (91.27%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about roles of BWDB whether 
they provide d any flood related services or advisories for protecting farmer crops from 
hazards like floods related calamities. However, only (8.72%) farmers indicated that they had 
knowledge about roles of BWDB which only provide d flood related forecasting information 
but not any agro -met services or advisories for protecting farmers' crops from the hazards 
like floods related calamities. 
 
Table 5.2: Perception about Roles of BWDB 
 
Response type Response of farmers 
No % 
Yes 89 8.72 
No 931 91.27 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
5.8 Knowledge about the Role of DAE on agro-met services 
 
Majority ( 79.61%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the r oles of DAE 
whether it provide d any agro-met services or advisories for protecting farmers' crops from 
the hazards related to weather, climate and flood like natural calamities. However, only 
20.39% farmers indicated that they had knowledge about the r ole of DAE which was only 
provided rainfall and f lood information to the farmers as received from the Field Service 
Wing o f DAE via Ministry of Agriculture through BMD but not any agro -met services or 
advisories for protecting farmer crops from the hazards related to weather, climate and flood 
like natural calamities.

DTCL Page-34 
 
 
Figure 5.5: Perception about Role of DAE on Agro-met Services 
 
5.9 Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 
Majority (8 9.80%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the coordination of 
BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-meteorological related information to the farmer 
communities. Though only 1 0.19% farmers indicated that they ha d a very little knowledge 
about the coordination of BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-meteorological related 
information due to field officials of DAE. 
 
Table 5.3: Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-
meteorological information 
 
Type of response Response of farmers 
No % 
Yes 104 10.19 
No 916 89.80 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
5.10 Channel of meteorological information delivery 
 
All farmers reported that there were not received any agro-meteorological services which 
were required to protect their crops from the damages . The highest (66.08%) farmers 
indicated that they had not received any meteorological information or services from any 
channel or sources. However, second highest (26.37%) farmers reported that received 
general meteorological information from the TV which was followed by Radio (26.18%). 
Conversely, the lowest (3%) farmers stated that they received this meteorological 
information from mobile SMS of DAE field level officials such as SAAOs, extension batayan 
club or IPM club etc. which was followed by analogue board (1.76%). 
 
Table 5.4: Channel of meteorological information delivery 
Media type Response (Number) Response (%) 
Analogue board 18 1.76 
Radio 267 26.18 
TV 269 26.37 
Mobile SMS 30 3.0 
Others (None) 674 66.08 
Multiple Responses 1258

DTCL Page-35 
5.11 Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 
Asking question about their satisfaction of information provided by the BMD, BWDB and 
DAE related to weather and climate information, almost all (90.99%) farmers reported that 
they were not satisfied enough of present information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE as 
it was only an information not any services or advisories so farmers were unable to take any 
measures to protect their crop from the damages. However, only (9.01%) farmers expressed 
their satisfaction with the information provided by the BMD, DAE and BWDB. 
 
Yes
No

9.01%

90.99%
Yes No
 
Figure 5.6: Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 
5.12 Source of getting information 
 
If they were not satisfying about the information provided by the BMD, BWDB and DAE then 
it was asked them, how they would like to get this information. The highest (51.50%) farmers 
opined that they would like to get this information from mobile SMS which was followed by 
Union Parishad Office (38.1%), and Upazila Agricultural Office (35.88%). The lowest (3.23%) 
farmers indicated that they would like to get this information from electronic & social media 
which was followed by Community people/farmers club etc. (32.6%). 
 
Table 5.5: Source of getting hydro-meteorological information 
 
Source of getting information Number % 
Upazila Agriculture Office 333 35.88% 
Union Parishad Office 388 38.1 
Community people 269 32.6 
Electronic & Social Media 30 3.23 
Mobile SMS 478 51.50 
Multiple responses 1498 
 
5.13 Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 
 
Asking question to the farmers whether they are getting information on seasonal variation of 
temperature, rainfall and othe r weather and climate data, all ( 91.66%) farmers strongly 
reported that they had not received any seasonal variation of temperature, rainfall and other 
weather and climate data which wa s very important for their crop planning considering 
weather and climate while 8.34% farmers indicated that they had no knowledge about this.

DTCL Page-36 
 
 
Figure 5.7: Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 
 
 
5.14 Benefit of meteorological information 
 
Majority ( 61.8%) farmers opined that meteorological information could be very useful for 
insect pests and disease management strategy of crops followed by crop production 
planning (58%), harvest and processing plan of crops (43.7%) and crop management plan 
(40.2%). However , the lowest (0.6%) farmers indicated that it could be useful for others 
category like storage and marketing purposes followed by irrigation planning (28.8%). 
 
Table 5.6: Benefit of meteorological information 
 
Type of benefit Number % 
Crop Production Planning 498 58.0 
Irrigation Planning 247 28.8 
Crop Management 345 40.2 
Harvest and processing 375 43.7 
Insect pests and disease management of crops 530 61.8 
Others 5 0.6 
Multiple responses 2000 
 
5.15 Necessity of agro-meteorological advisories and services 
 
Almost all (95.10%) farmers opined that they need agro -meteorological products, advisories 
and services to protect their crops from the damage while only 4.90% farmers reported they 
had no requirement of agro-meteorological products, advisories and services to protect their 
crops from the damage . It was due to their lack of knowledge on agro -met services and 
advisories. 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Yes No Do Not know

935 85

91.66 8.34
Number %

DTCL Page-37 
 
 
Figure 5.8: Necessity of agro-meteorological services 
 
5.16 Adoption of new technology and techniques 
 
Almost all (99.01%) farmers reported that they were not adopt ed any new technology, 
cropping pattern and crop production schedule to avoid weather and climate induced 
problems as they were not currently getting any agro -meteorological products, advisories 
and services while only 0.99% farmers reported they were adopted new technology, 
cropping pattern and crop production schedule to avoid weather and climate induced 
problems conspiring previous year weather and climate records. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.9: Adoption of new technology and techniques 
 
5.17 Type of techniques to be adopted 
 
Majority (78.6%) farmers reported that they could adopt new technology like insect pest 
tolerant crop varieties to avoid weather and climate induced problems which was followed by 
disease tolerant crop varieties (78%) and drought tolerant crop varieties (48.1%). However , 
the lowest (1%) percent farmers reported they could adopt any new technology like others 
such as crop management or planning or changing of cropping pattern which was followed 
by heat tolerant crop varieties (11.2%), salt tolerant crop varieties (12.1) , and cold tolerant 
crop varieties (28%) to avoid weather and climate induced problems. 
 
Number %
Yes 970 95.1
No 50 4.9

95.150 4.9

Yes No

DTCL Page-38 
Table 5.7: Type of techniques to be adopted 
 
Adoption type Number % 
Drought tolerant crop varieties 326 48.1 
Salt tolerant crop varieties 82 12.1 
Disease tolerant crop varieties 529 78.0 
Insect pest tolerant crop varieties 533 78.6 
Heat tolerant crop varieties 76 11.2 
Cold tolerant crop varieties 190 28.0 
Others 7 1.0 
Multiple responses 1743 
 
5.18 Knowledge on existing weather forecast to protect crop production 
 
Around three fourth percent (74.71%) farmers out of 1020 respondents indicated that the 
existing weather forecast was not enough to protect crop production from the damage due to 
natural calamities while 24.51% farmers opined that they had no idea about th is. However, 
only 0.78% farmers reported that they had knowledge o f existing weather forecast to protect 
crop production from the damages. 

0.78
74.71
24.51
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00

Yes No Don't know
Response
No %
 
Figure 5.10: Knowledge of existing weather forecast to protect crop production 
 
5.19 Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 
 
More than fifty percent (54.9%) farmers indicated that they had not any access of 
meteorological information or available for them followed by sometimes (36.4%). However, 
the lowest (2.2%) farmers reported that meteorological information was highly accessible or 
available for farmers followed by when I look for it (6.6%). 
 
Table 5.8: Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 
 
Frequency of information Number % 
Not at all 560 54.9 
Sometimes 371 36.4 
When I look for it 67 6.6 
Highly accessible 22 2.2 
Total 1020 100.0

DTCL Page-39 
5.20 Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 
 
Almost all (91.37%) farmers reported that current meteorological information or forecast was 
not effective as it was just a general information not agro -met services thus farmers were 
unable to take any measures to protect their crops from the damages. If they received agro-
meteorological information with advisories that helpful for them to protect their crops from the 
damages. Currently, they had no t no knowledge about the measures to be taken upon 
received weather and climate information to protect crop from the damages. The second 
highest (6.86%) farmers indicated that it was less effective to protect their crop from the 
disaster. However, the lowest ( 0.69%) percent farmers reported that current meteorological 
information specially rainfall, temperature and flood were very effective to protect crop from 
the damages or risks of weather and climate while 1.08% farmers stated that it was effective 
to protect crop from the damages. 
 
Table 5.9: Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 
 
Degree of effectiveness Number % 
Very effective 7 0.69 
Effective 11 1.08 
Less Effective 70 6.86 
Not Effective 932 91.37 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
5.21 Traditional methods used for applying weather forecasts 
 
Due to lack of agro-met services, farmers were mostly us ed traditional method to protect 
their crops from the weather and climate induced problems. Majority (56.2%) farmers 
reported that they were currently planned their crop production based on past two years' 
weather while 54.1% farmers informed that they were followed last year weather for crop 
planning. However, the lowest (7%) percent farmers reported that they were followed others 
such as weather and climate forecast of government agencies while 38.9% farmers depend 
on prediction or suggestions of older person of the family. 
 
Table 5.12: Methods used for applying weather forecasts 
 
Weather forecasts method Number Percentage (%) 
last year weather 545 54.1 
past 2 years weather 566 56.2 
prediction of older person of family 392 38.9 
Others (weather forecast) 71 7.0 
Multiple Responses 1574 
 
 
5.22 Perception of traditional weather forecasts 
 
 
Farmers are mostly using traditional method to protect their crops from weather and climate 
induced problems. While asking about the perception of traditional weather forecast, the 
majority (80.78%) farmers informed that this forecast was not reliable at al l but they need to 
depend on it as there was no agro -meteorological products or services. Around (17.94%) 
farmers reported that traditional weather forecasts were sometimes reliable while 1.07% 
farmer opined that it was always reliable.

DTCL Page-40 

Not reliable Sometimes Always reliable Other

11 2
80.78
17.94
1.07 0.2
No. %
 
 
Figure 5.11: Perception of traditional weather forecasts 
 
5.23 Type of crops to be grown based on forecast 
 
Almost all (92.84) farmers indicated that they didn't wait for weather forecast for deciding 
what type of crop s will be grown as there was no crop and location -based agro -
meteorological forecast/services or other reliable forecast s which could depend for crop 
planning. Only 7.15% farmers informed that they decided their crop production plan based 
on general weather forecast. 
 
Table 5.10: Decision on type of crops to be grown based on forecast 
 
 
Type of response Farmer response 
Number % 
Yes 73 7.15 
No 947 92.84 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
5.24 Decisions making time for planting crops 
 
Majority (68%) farmers opined that they used to follow usual season for making decision for 
planting of crop which was followed by use traditional forecast (10.6%) and follow neighbors 
(8.85). However, the lowest (3.4%) farmers informed that they used to make a decision for 
planting crops after receiving forecast of weather and climate which was followed by wait for 
rains (9.1%). 
 
86%
88%
90%
92%
94%
96%
98%
100%
After
receiving
forecasts
Follow usual
season
Wait for
rains
Use
traditional
forecasts
Follow
neighbors
% 3.4 68 9.1 10.6 8.8
No 35 694 93 108 90
35 694 93 108 90
3.4 68 9.1 10.6 8.8
 
Figure 5.12: Decision making time for planting crops

DTCL Page-41 
CHAPTER-6 
 
User Satisfaction Index using Baseline Survey 
 
This section describes overall weather forecast and climate related information available for 
farmers. The objective of the study is to identify existing agro -meteorological information, 
ongoing observed parameters and technologies of Bangladesh Meteorological Department 
(BMD) and t o assess the farmer's knowledge and satisfaction on weather forecast and or 
agromet advisory services at community level. It is envisaged to develop Bangladesh 
agricultural meteorological information system services to help farme rs mitigate climate 
related production risks, the project provides support for the establishment of early warning 
systems, upgrading the existing hydro -meteorological system, and enhancing human 
capacity. User's Satisfaction Index provides the information regarding the understanding of 
the user's or customer's on goods or services. This is basically the outcome -oriented 
approach regards satisfaction as an attribute extracted from a product or service after its 
consumption whether the objectives of systems o r the organizational unit utilizing the 
systems are achieved or not. Thus, this section focuses the knowledge and use of weather 
forecast, present status of the user's satisfaction level of the district 
 
6.1 Knowledge or experience of the farmers on weather forecast 
 
Regarding the knowledge or experience of the farmers on weather forecast, majority 86.86% 
of the farmers are found to have lack of knowledge on it. Insignificant proportion of the 
farmers had knowledge on weather forecast accounting for only 13.14% of the total farmers. 
However, highest 88.83% of the farmers are found to have lack of knowledge on it in 
Naogaogn district and the lowest (85%) farmers had the knowledge on it in the Bandarban 
district which is presented in the following table. 
 
Table-6.1: Districts-wise knowledge or experience farmer's on weather forecast 
 
Type of Hydro-
meteorological 
Extreme Event 
District 
Total 
Respondents 
Farmer's Response 
Do have 
knowledge 
Do not have 
knowledge 
N=1020 Number % Number % 
Drought 
Cold wave, 
Storm 
Rajshahi 170 22 12.94 148 87.06 
Naogaon 188 21 11.17 167 88.83 
Cyclone, Salt, 
Flood 
Patuakhali 84 13 15.48 71 84.52 
Satkhira 118 18 15.25 100 84.75 
Flash/ Pre-
Monsoon Flood 
Sunamganj 114 15 13.16 99 86.84 
Netrokona 132 18 13.64 114 86.36 
Forest 
Degradation 
Khagrachari 174 24 13.79 150 86.21 
Bandarban 40 6 15.00 34 85.00 
 Total 1020 134 13.14 886 86.86 
 
6.2 Practice of using different weather forecast by farmers 
 
As has been already mentioned in the above that overwhelming majority of the farmers did not 
have knowledge on weather forecast, however those insignificant proportion of the 
respondents having knowledge on it are using different components of weather fore cast during 
the last 12 months such as rain, temperature, cloud cover, direction and speed of wind etc. 
Among those respondents having knowledge on weather forecast, maximum proportion of 
farmers were the users of forecast of rainfall and cyclone accountin g for 97.76%, this is 
followed by the users of the temperature forecast, which accounted for 95.52% of the total 
knowledgeable respondents. In case of wind and flood/flash flood, the proportions of users are 
found to be only 76.87% in each and 61.19% in co ld-wave of the total knowledgeable 
respondents. Similarly, the users of forecast of other weather components are found to be

DTCL Page-42 
comparatively very low viz. users of forecast of landslide stood at 8.21%, this is followed by the 
salinity (14.18%), Lightening (20.15%), Nor 'wester (38.81%), heatwave (46.27%), and drought 
(58.21%) only of the total knowledgeable respondents of 134. 
 
Table-6.2: Use of different weather forecasts in last 12 months by weather 
components 
Weather Components 
Farmer's Response 
N=134 (13.14%) of the total respondents) 
Number of responses % of response 
Rainfall 131 97.76 
Temperature 128 95.52 
Wind (direction, speed) 103 76.87 
Drought 78 58.21 
Cold-wave 82 61.19 
Heatwave 62 46.27 
Nor 'wester 52 38.81 
Lightening 27 20.15 
Flood/Flash Flood 103 76.87 
Salinity 19 14.18 
Storm surge 71 52.99 
Cyclone 131 97.76 
Landslide 11 8.21 
Multiple Responses 998 
 
6.3 Weather related knowledge prior to agro-activities 
 
It is often advisable to the farmers to acquire weather related knowledge prior to agro -activities 
in order to safeguard the seeds to be used or crops to be cultivated or harvested in the farm. In 
this regard, the farmers should have adequate knowledge abo ut the weather and its forecast 
and implement their knowledge by checking weather forecast regularly in time. An enquiry into 
the acquirement of weather -related knowledge prior to agro -activities revealed that 
insignificantly very less proportion of the fa rmers are found to have acquired weather related 
conditions (knowledge) prior to agro -activities. For instance, out of total 134 farmers having 
knowledge about the weather forecast, only 26.87% of them are found to have acquired 
knowledge prior to agro -activities under less often category. This is followed by acquiring 
knowledge once every three months, which accounted for 20.90% and 14.18% in once in a 
month and once a fortnight. However, the lowest 6.72% farmers are found to have acquired 
weather related knowledge prior to agro-activities under daily basis. This is followed by the 2 -3 
days a week (7.46% and once ia week (9.70%). 
 
Table-6.3: Attainment of weather-related knowledge prior to agro-activities by weather 
forecasts 
 
Weather Forecast Schedule 
Farmer's Response 
N=134 of the total respondents) 
Number of responses % of response 
Daily basis 9 6.72 
2-3 days a week 10 7.46 
Once a week 13 9.70 
Once a fortnight 19 14.18 
Once in a month 19 14.18 
Once every 2-3 months 28 20.90 
Less often 36 26.87 
Total 134 100%

DTCL Page-43 
6.4 User's Satisfaction Level on the accuracy of weather-related information 
 
The methodology for calculation of the user satisfaction index is given below. The 
user's satisfaction index is a simple and straightforward approach that is used widely 
in planning and evaluation studies such as human development index and rating 
index (Sullivan, 2002; Sullivan et. al. 2003). Specifically, this satisfaction scale wa s 
developed on the basis of summated rating scale, which is most commonly known 
as Likert scale, was based on the assumption that each attribute on the scale has 
equal 'attitudinal value' or 'importance' or 'weight' in terms of reflecting an attitude 
towards the issue in question. Summated scales consisted of numbers of related 
statements that express either a favourable or unfavourable attitude towards an 
issue of interest. These statements or attributes usually consisted of a mixture of 
favourable and unfavourable statements. 
 
5-point Likert rating scale has been used to provide comparison and analysis by using the 
satisfaction rating classified as (i) Highly favourable (ii) Favourable (iii) Neutral (undecided) 
(iv) Not favourable and (v) Not favourable at all. 
 
4-point Likert rating scale has been used to provide comparison and analysis by using the 
satisfaction rating classified as (i) Highly favourable (ii) Favourable (iii) Not favourable and 
(iv) Not favourable at all. 
 
The responses indicating the least favourable to strongly favourableness degree had given 
the appropriate score; and the User's Satisfaction Index for different key attributes was 
calculated by using the following formula. 
 
User Satisfaction Index for 5-point scale= 
fhs (Shs)+ fs (Ss)+fu (Su)+fns (Sns)+fnsal (Snsal)
N 
User Satisfaction Index for 4-point scale= 
fhs (Shs)+ fs (Ss)+fns (Sns)+fnsal (Snsal)
N 
Where, 
 fhs = frequency of highly satisfied, and Shs = score of highly satisfied 
 fs = frequency of satisfied, and Ss = score of satisfied 
 fu = frequency of undecided, and Su = score of undecideds 
 fns = frequency of not satisfied, and Sns = score of not satisfied 
 fnsal = frequency of not satisfied at all, and Snsal = score of not satisfied at all 
 N = Total number of observations 
 
The questionnaire contained questions related to service attributes unique to the service 
type. These attributes were then rated against performance using 5 point and 4 -point Likert 
scaleTo determine the User's Satisfaction Index (USI), the following five parameters were 
used as given below: 
❖ Accuracy of weather information (forecast) provided by the service organizations. 
❖ Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers provided by the service 
organizations 
❖ Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast provided by the service organizations 
 
The 5-point index for any individual attribute falls between 1 to 5. If the index happens to be 
above 3, it shows favourable opinion to the given attribute indicating the percentage of 
people with positive a ttitude towards the service provided by the service organizations. An 
index of below 3 would mean unfavourable opinion to the given attribute indicating the 
percentage of people with negative attitude towards the service, and exactly 3 would be 
suggestive of a neutral attribute or undecisive perception. The 4-point index is very similar 
where individual value falls between 1 to 4 with no neutral attribute or undecisive perception.

DTCL Page-44 
Though the level for different attributes has been measured by using both 5 -point and 4-
point Likert scale, an attempt has also been made to show the satisfaction level (or 
favourableness / unfavourableness) in percentage 
 
As has been already mentioned that there were number of organizations established for 
providing weather related information to the farmers. However, only a small segment of the 
population having knowledge on it were found to have acquired this weather -related 
information. The degree of satisfaction level has been measured by using 5 -point Likert 
scale as has been mentioned in the methodology section along with the satisfaction level in 
percentage. An index value of above 3 shows the favourable opinion to the given attribute 
indicating the percentage of people with favourable (or positive) attitude towards the serv ice 
provided by the service organizations. An index of below 3 would mean unfavourable opinion 
(or negative) to the given attribute indicating that they are driven towards the negative 
attitude regarding the service, and exactly 3 would be suggestive of a neutral attribute or 
undecisive perception. 
 
The degree of satisfaction level on the accuracy of weather-related information of the service 
provider perceived by the respondents is shown in Table 4.1. 
 
Table 6.1: Satisfaction level on the accuracy of weather-related information (%) 
Weather 
Compon
ents 
Farmer's Response 
Highly 
satisfied 
Moderately 
satisfied 
Can't 
say 
(neutral) 
Not 
satisfied 
Not 
satisfied 
at all 
Total 
Respondents 
Index % of 
Satisfacti
on 
Rainfall 7.46 13.43 38.81 24.63 15.67 100.00 2.724 44.48 
10 18 52 33 21 134 
Temperat
ure 
8.21 14.18 36.57 23.13 17.91 100.00 2.717 44.33 
11 19 49 31 24 134 
Wind 
(direction
, speed) 
0.00 1.49 48.51 26.12 23.88 100.00 2.276 35.522 
0 2 65 35 32 134 
Drought 1.49 3.73 43.28 27.61 23.88 100.00 2.313 36.262 
2 5 58 37 32 134 
Cold-
wave 
1.49 3.73 43.28 27.61 23.88 100.00 2.313 36.262 
2 5 58 37 32 134 
Heatwav
e 
1.49 3.73 43.28 27.61 23.88 100.00 2.313 36.262 
2 5 58 37 32 134 
Nor 
'wester 
3.73 7.46 41.04 26.87 20.90 100.00 2.463 39.25 
5 10 55 36 28 134 
Lightenin
g 
0.00 1.49 50.75 26.12 21.64 100.00 2.321 36.42 
0 2 68 35 29 134 
Flood/Fla
sh Flood 
3.73 8.96 44.03 24.63 18.66 100.00 2.545 40.9 
5 12 59 33 25 134 
Salinity 0.00 15.45 39.84 25.20 19.51 100.00 2.512 40.25 
0 19 49 31 24 123 
Storm 
surge 
1.49 14.18 37.31 26.87 20.15 100.00 2.5 40 
2 19 50 36 27 134 
Cyclone 5.97 13.43 36.57 26.12 17.91 100.00 2.634 42.69 
8 18 49 35 24 134 
Landslide 0.00 0.00 48.51 28.36 23.13 100.00 2.254 35.08 
0 0 65 38 31 134 
 
As revealed from the above table, none of the weather parameters have index of above 3. 
However, the highest index value among others are the forecast of rainfall, temperature and 
cyclone showing the index of 2.724, 2.717 and 2.634 and in percentage 44.48 , 44.33 and 
42.69% respectively. It is interesting to note that the index value of none of the attributes 
were found to be 3 or greater than 3 nor 2 or less than 2. This shows that neither the service 
recipients are satisfied/highly satisfied nor neutral/not satisfied at all. It shows that the overall

DTCL Page-45 
satisfaction level of the common people on the forecast of weather-related information is 'not 
satisfacied'. Hence there is a definite need of improvement in the service of the service 
organizations. 
 
6.5 Knowledge about the service of Bangladesh Agriculture Meteorological 
Information System (BAMIS) 
 
It is ironical to note that almost all respondents did not have knowledge about the service of 
Bangladesh Agriculture M eteorological Information System ( BAMIS). The farmers having 
knowledge about is found to be only 2.45% of the total respondents while 97.55% farmers 
were still unaware about the weather forecast/BAMIS portal s ervice from the AMISDP. This 
is indicating that there is a high need of further dissemination of information about it. 
 
Table 5: Knowledge about the services of BAMIS by area (in%) 
Knowledge Response of the Farmer's (N=1020) 
Number Percentage 
Have knowledge 25 2.45 
Do not Have knowledge 1010 97.55 
Total 995 100 
 
6.6 Source of Agro-Meteorological Information 
 
There was no agro-meteorological service for farmers in the country. Farmers were getting 
forecast information on meteorological matters such as rain, storm, cyclone, heat wave, cold 
wave, thunderstorm etc. through different sources. Majority ( 42.74%) farmers reported that 
they did not get any meteorological information while second highest (37.15%) farmers 
received meteorological information from the TV which was followed by DAE (30.39%), 
community people (30%) and radio (25.6%). However, the lowest (0.2%) farmers indicated 
that they received information from the other s ources like DAE IPM club/extension battayan 
club which was followed by local level micing (8%), and mobile SMS (9.4%). Aside this 
around 2.15% farmers indicated that they received meteorological information from the 
social media. 
 
Table 6: Meteorological related information in the project area 
Source of getting information of weather, 
climate, rainfall and flood etc. 
Multiple responses 
Number % 
Radio 260 25.6 
TV 379 37.15 
Social media 22 2.15 
Mobile SMS 95 9.4 
Local level miking 81 8.0 
Community people 305 30.0 
None 436 42.74 
DAE 310 30.39 
Multiple responses 1680 
 
6.7 Perception about the Govt. organization providing weather & climate related 
information 
 
Asking the question on knowledge about the name of government organizations that 
provided temperature, rainfall, cyclone, storm, heat wave, and cold wave information , the 
majority (56%) farmer reported that they didn't have any knowledge about the organization 
that provided this information . The second highest ( 25%) farmer indicated that they were 
getting this information from the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) field level 
officials and extension batayan /IPM club etc. Conversely, 19% farmers indicated that they 
are getting weather and climate related information from Bangladesh Meteorological

DTCL Page-46 
Department (BMD) through radio, TV or local level miking. However, none of them reported 
about BWDB. 
 
 
Figure 6.1: Knowledge about the organization providing weather & climate information 
 
6.8 Perception about the govt. organization providing flood related information 
 
Asking the question on knowledge about the organizations provid ing flood, flash flood, and 
coastal flood related information, the majority ( 58.73%) farmer reported that they didn't have 
any knowledge about the organization who was providing flood related information while 
25.10% farmers indicated that they were getting these flood related information from the 
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) field level officials and ext ension batayan/IPM 
club etc. The lowest (1.37%) farmer indicated that they were getting this information from the 
Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) local level officials which were followed by 
Bangladesh Water Development Board (14.80%). The above findings clearly indicated that 
farmers didn't have a clear idea about the government agency who was providing flood 
related information. 
 
 
Figure 2: Knowledge about the organization providing flood information 
 
6.9 Timing of information to save crops and properties from the damages 
 
Most (86.6%) of the farmers indicated that they were not getting enough time after receiving 
information to save crops from the damage. Even they were not quite enough sure what to

DTCL Page-47 
do after getting this information as it was only information of weather not any services or 
advise which was required for farmers to save crop from the damages. However, only 13.4% 
farmers opined that they were getting enough time after getting information to save crop 
from the damages. 

13.4

86.6
1 2
Yes No
 
Figure 3: Timing of information to save crops and properties from the damages 
 
6.10 Minimum advance forecast time 
 
Majority (54.6%) farmers reported that they need at least 7 days' advance forecast 
information of weather and climate with advisories or services to save their crops from the 
damage which is followed by 15 days (29.3%). However, the lowest (1.5%) farmers reported 
that they need at more than 15 days' advance forecast information of weather and climate 
with advisories or services to save their crops from the damage which is followed by 3 days 
(14.6%). 
 
 
Figure 4: Minimum advance forecast time required to save crop from the damages 
 
6.11 Knowledge about Role of BMD 
 
Majority ( 80.78%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the r oles of BMD 
whether it provided any services or advisories for protecting farmers' crops from the hazards 
like drought, high temperature, cold & heat wave, storms, cyclone and related calamities. 
Though only 19.22% farmers indicated that they had a little bit knowledge about the roles of 
BMD which was only provide d meteorological information like tempe rature, rainfall and 
cyclone information but not any agro -met services or advisories for protecting farmers from

DTCL Page-48 
the hazards like drought, high temperature, cold & heat wave, storms, cyclone and related 
calamities 

1 2

19.22%

80.78%
Yes No
Figure 5: Perception about Roles of BMD 
 
6.12 Knowledge about Role of BWDB 
 
Majority (91.27%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about roles of BWDB whether 
they provided any flood related services or advisories for protecting farmer crops from 
hazards like floods related calamities. However, only (8.72%) farmers indicated that they had 
a knowledge about roles of BWDB which only provided flood related forecasting information 
but not any agro -met services or advisories for protecting farmers' crop s from the hazards 
like floods related calamities. 
 
Table 7: Perception about Roles of BWDB 
Response type Response of farmers 
No % 
Yes 89 8.72 
No 931 91.27 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
6.13 Knowledge about the Role of DAE on agro-met services 
 
Majority (79.61%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the r oles of DAE 
whether it provided any agro -met services or advisories for protecting farmers' crops from 
the hazards related to weather, climate and flood like natural calamities. However, only 
20.39% farmers indicated that they had knowledge about the r ole of DAE which was only 
provided rainfall and flood information to the farmers as received from the Field Service 
Wing of DAE vi a Ministry of Agriculture through BMD but not any agro -met services or 
advisories for protecting farmer crops from the hazards related to weather, climate and flood 
like natural calamities. 
 
Figure 6: Perception about Role of DAE on Agro-met Services

DTCL Page-49 
6.14 Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 
Majority (89.80%) farmers opined that they had no knowledge about the coordination of 
BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-meteorological related information to the farmer 
communities. Though only 10.19% farmers indicated that they had a very little knowledge 
about the coordination of BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-meteorological related 
information due to field officials of DAE. 
 
Table 9: Coordination among BMD, BWDB and DAE to disseminate hydro-
meteorological information 
Type of response Response of farmers 
No % 
Yes 104 10.19 
No 916 89.80 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
6.15 Channel of meteorological information delivery 
 
All farmers reported that there were not received any agro -meteorological services which 
were required to protect their crops from the damages. The highest (66.08%) farmers' 
indicated that they had not received any meteorological information or services fr om any 
channel or sources. However, second highest (26.37%) farmers reported that received 
general meteorological information from the TV which was followed by Radio (26.18%). 
Conversely, the lowest (3%) farmers stated that they received this meteorologica l 
information from mobile SMS of DAE field level officials such as SAAOs, extension batayan 
club or IPM club etc. which was followed by analogue board (1.76%). 
 
Table 10: Channel of meteorological information delivery 
Media type Response (Number) Response (%) 
Analogue board 18 1.76 
Radio 267 26.18 
TV 269 26.37 
Mobile SMS 30 3.0 
Others (None) 674 66.08 
Multiple Responses 1258 
 
6.16 Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 
Asking question about their satisfaction of information provided by the BMD, BWDB and 
DAE related to weather and climate information, almost all (90.99%) farmers reported that 
they were not satisfied enough of present information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE as 
it was only an information not any services or advisories so farmers were unable to take any 
measures to protect their crop from the damages. However, only (9.01%) farmers expressed 
their satisfaction with the information provided by the BMD, DAE and BWDB. 
 
Yes
No

9.01%

90.99%
Yes No
Figure 7: Satisfaction of the information provided by BMD, BWDB and DAE

DTCL Page-50 
6.17 Source of getting information 
 
If they were not satisfying about the information provided by the BMD, BWDB and DAE then 
it was asked them, how they would like to get this information. The highest (51.50%) farmers 
opined that they would like to get this information from mobile SMS which was followed by 
Union Parishad Office (38.1%), and Upazila Agricultural Office (35.88%). The lowest (3.23%) 
farmers indicated that they would like to get this information from electronic & social media 
which was followed by Community people/farmers club etc. (32.6%). 
 
Table 11: Source of getting hydro-meteorological information 
Source of getting information Number % 
Upazila Agriculture Office 333 35.88% 
Union Parishad Office 388 38.1 
Community people 269 32.6 
Electronic & Social Media 30 3.23 
Mobile SMS 478 51.50 
Multiple responses 1498 
 
6.18 Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 
 
Asking question to the farmers whether they are getting information on seasonal variation of 
temperature, rainfall and other weather and climate data, all (91.66%) farmers strongly 
reported that they had not received any seasonal variation of temperature, rainfall and other 
weather and climate data which was very important for their crop planning considering 
weather and climate while 8.34% farmers indicated that they had no knowledge about this. 
 
 
Figure 8: Information on seasonal variation data of weather and climate 
 
6.19 Benefit of meteorological information 
 
Majority (61.8%) farmers opined that meteorological information could be very useful for 
insect pests and disease management strategy of crops followed by crop production 
planning (58%), harvest a nd processing plan of crops (43.7%) and crop management plan 
(40.2%). However, the lowest (0.6%) farmers indicated that it could be useful for others 
category like storage and marketing purposes followed by irrigation planning (28.8%). 
 
Table 12: Benefit of meteorological information 
Type of benefit Number % 
Crop Production Planning 498 58.0 
Irrigation Planning 247 28.8 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Yes No Do Not know

935 85

91.66 8.34
Number %

DTCL Page-51 
Crop Management 345 40.2 
Harvest and processing 375 43.7 
Insect pests and disease 
management of crops 530 61.8 
Others 5 0.6 
Multiple responses 2000 
 
6.20 Necessity of agro-meteorological advisories and services 
 
Almost all (95.10%) farmers opined that they need agro -meteorological products, advisories 
and services to protect their crops from the damage while only 4.90% farmers reported they 
had no requirement of agro-meteorological products, advisories and services to protect their 
crops from the damage. It was due t o their lack of knowledge on agro -met services and 
advisories. 
 
 
Figure 9: Necessity of agro-meteorological services 
 
6.21 Knowledge on existing weather forecast to protect crop production 
 
Around three fourth percent (74.71%) farmers out of 1020 respondents indicated that the 
existing weather forecast was not enough to protect crop production from the damage due to 
natural calamities while 24.51% farmers opined that they had no idea about th is. However, 
only 0.78% farmers reported that they had knowledge of existing weather forecast to protect 
crop production from the damages. 

0.78
74.71
24.51
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00

Yes No Don't know
Response
No %
 
Figure 10: Knowledge of existing weather forecast to protect crop production 
 
Number %
Yes 970 95.1
No 50 4.9

95.150 4.9

Yes No

DTCL Page-52 
6.22 Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 
 
More than fifty percent (54.9%) farmers indicated that they had not any access of 
meteorological information or available for them followed by sometimes (36.4%). However, 
the lowest (2.2%) farmers reported that meteorological information was highly accessi ble or 
available for farmers followed by when I look for it (6.6%). 
 
Table 13: Accessibility of meteorological information to the farmers 
Frequency of information Number % 
Not at all 560 54.9 
Sometimes 371 36.4 
When I look for it 67 6.6 
Highly accessible 22 2.2 
Total 1020 100.0 
The degree of satisfaction level has been measured by using 4-point Likert scale as has 
been mentioned in the methodology section along with the satisfaction level in percentage. 
 
Table 14: Satisfaction level on the accessibility of meteorological related information 
(%) 
Component 
Farmers Response 
Not at all When I 
look for it Sometimes Highly 
accessible 
Total 
Respondents index % of 
Satisfaction 
Accessibility 54.9 6.6 36.4 2.2 100 1.861 34.025 560 67 371 22 1020 
 
The above values inferred that neither the information recipients are satisfied/highly satisfied 
nor unsatisfied at all, showing that overall satisfaction level of the common people on 
accessing meteorological related information is on unsatisfied level and need to be improved 
in this regard. 
 
6.23 Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 
 
Almost all (91.37%) farmers reported that current meteorological information or forecast was 
not effective as it was just a general information not agro -met services thus farmers were 
unable to take any measures to protect their crops from the damages. If they received agro-
meteorological information with advisories that helpful for them to protect their crops from the 
damages. Currently, they had not no knowledge about the measures to be taken upon 
received weather and climate information to protect crop from the damages. 
 
The second highest (6.86%) farmers indicated that it was less effective to protect their crop 
from the disaster. However, the lowest (0.69%) percent farmers reported that current 
meteorological information specially rainfall, temperature and flood were ver y effective to 
protect crop from the damages or risks of weather and climate while 1.08% farmers stated 
that it was effective to protect crop from the damages. 
 
Table 15: Effectiveness of Meteorological forecast 
Degree of effectiveness Number % 
Very effective 7 0.69 
Effective 11 1.08 
Less Effective 70 6.86 
Not Effective 932 91.37 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
The degree of satisfaction level has been measured by using 4 -point Likert scale as has 
been mentioned in the methodology section along with the satisfaction level in percentage.

DTCL Page-53 
Table 16: Satisfaction level on the effectiveness of meteorological forecast (%) 
Component 
Farmers Response 
Very 
effective Effective Less 
Effective 
Not 
Effective 
Total 
Respondents index % of Satisfaction 
Degree of 
Effectiveness 
0.69 1.08 6.86 91.37 100 1.1109 15.2725 7 11 70 932 1020 
 
The above values inferred that neither the information recipients are satisfied/highly satisfied 
nor unsatisfied, showing that overall satisfaction level of the common people on 
effectiveness of meteorological forecast is on 'not satisfied at all' and need definite 
improvement in this regard. 
 
6.24 Traditional methods used for applying weather forecasts 
 
Due to lack of agro -met services, farmers were mostly used traditional method to protect 
their crops from the weather and climate induced problems. Majority (56.2%) farmers 
reported that they were currently planned their crop production based on past two years' 
weather while 54.1% farmers informed that they were followed last year weather for crop 
planning. However, the lowest (7%) percent farmers reported that they were followed others 
such as weather and climate forecast of government agencies while 38.9% farmers depend 
on prediction or suggestions of older person of the family. 
 
Table 17: Methods used for applying weather forecasts. 
Weather forecasts method Number Percentage (%) 
last year weather 545 54.1 
past 2 years weather 566 56.2 
prediction of older person of 
family 392 38.9 
Others (weather forecast) 71 7.0 
Multiple Responses 1574 
 
6.25 Perception of traditional weather forecasts 
 
Farmers are mostly using traditional method to protect their crops from weather and climate 
induced problems. While asking about the perception of traditional weather forecast, the 
majority (80.78%) farmers informed that this forecast was not reliable at a ll but they need to 
depend on it as there was no agro -meteorological products or services. Around (17.94%) 
farmers reported that traditional weather forecasts were sometimes reliable while 1.07% 
farmer opined that it was always reliable. 

Not reliable Sometimes Always reliable Other

11 2
80.78
17.94
1.07 0.2
No. %
 
Figure 11: Perception of traditional weather forecasts

DTCL Page-54 
6.26 Participated in any awareness campaign/training regarding weather forecast 
 
All (100%) farmers informed that they had not participate in any awareness campaign or 
training regarding weather forecast as there was no such kind of opportunities created in 
their area but they were interested to participate in awareness campaign or training 
regarding agro-meteorological weather forecast and services. 
 
Table 18: Participation in any awareness campaign or training regarding weather 
forecast 
Type of response N % 
Yes 0 00 
No 1020 100 
Total 1020 100.0

DTCL Page-55 
CHAPTER-7 
 
TRAINING AND AWARENESS 
 
This chapter describes overall weather and climate related training and awareness . The 
objective of the study was to identify existing training and awareness on weather and 
climate and future requirement of agro-meteorological services training and awareness . As 
per the objectives, findings of the study ha d been presented herewith mainly based on the 
primary and secondary data. 
 
7.1 Knowledge on agro-meteorological weather forecast and cope-up technique 
 
It was asked to the farmers whether they have any knowledge on agro -meteorological 
weather forecast and cope-up technique, almost all (98.52%) farmers reported that they had 
not any knowledge on agro -meteorological weather forecast and cope -up techniques while 
negligible 1.48% farmers stated that they ha d knowledge on agro -meteorological weather 
forecast and cope -up technique. It might be their lack of knowledge about agro -
meteorological weather forecast which is not available right now. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.1: Knowledge on agro-meteorological weather forecast and cope-up 
technique 
 
7.2 Techniques of coping-up this problem 
 
If there are any reliable agro-meteorological services based on crop and region, farmer can 
coping-up this problem with cropping pattern, varietal change or adjustment of management 
practices etc. Based on this question were asked to the fa rmers where majority (89.1%) 
farmers reported that they can use the techniques of varietal change for copping up this 
problem which is followed by changing of crop (71.4%). Aside from this, 13.3% farmers 
indicated they will cope-up with the adjustment of management.

DTCL Page-56 

Crop change Varietal change Adjust
management
Other
Number 355 443 66 6
% 71.4 89.1 13.3 1.2

71.4 89.1
13.3
1.2
Response
 
 
 
Figure 6.1: Technique for coping-up this problem 
 
7.3 Participated in any awareness campaign/training regarding weather forecast 
 
All (100%) farmers informed that they had not participate in any awareness campaign or 
training regarding weather forecast as there was no such kind of opportunities created in 
their area but they were interested to participate in awareness campaign or training 
regarding agro-meteorological weather forecast and services. 
 
Table 7.1: Participation in any awareness campaign or training regarding weather 
forecast 
 
Type of response N % 
Yes 0 00 
No 1020 100 
Total 1020 100.0 
 
7.4 Willingness to participate in any awareness campaign or training 
 
Almost all (98%) farmers opined that they were interested to participate in any awareness 
campaign or training on weather and climate at DAE regarding weather forecast or agro-met 
products and services while 2% farmers indicated that they are not interested to participate 
in any awareness campaign or training on weather forecast.

DTCL Page-57 
 
 
Figure 7.2: Willingness to participate in any awareness campaign or training on 
weather forecast 
 
7.5 Location of training 
 
Majority (60.7%) farmers stated that they would like to participate training at DAE regarding 
weather forecast or agro -met products and services while 41.5% farmers indicated that it 
would be better if the training i s in BMD. However, the lowest (7.3%) farmers reported that 
they would like to participate in this training in BWDB followed by NGOs (26.5%). 
 
 
 
Figure 7.3: Location of training regarding weather forecast

DTCL Page-58 
7.6 Areas of interest for awareness campaign or training 
 
Around three -fourth percent (71.5%) farmers indicated that they were interested in 
awareness campaign or training in the field of location specific and crop-based weather and 
climate related forecast followed by agro -mets services or information of weather and 
climate related problems (69.9%). Less than fifty percent (44.4%) farmers stated that they 
were interested in awareness campaign or training in the field of crop management followed 
by planning of irrigation (42%). 
 
Table 7.2: Areas of interest for awareness campaign or training 
Type of awareness campaign or training Number % 
Location and crop-based weather forecast 706 71.5 
Agro-met services of weather & climate problems 691 69.9 
Planning of Irrigation 415 42.0 
Crop management 439 44.4 
Others 10 0.8 
Multiple Responses 2261 
 
7.7 Preferred ways of receiving weather and climate forecasts 
 
Around 90.68% farmers informed that the ir preferred ways to get agrometeorological 
services through SMS followed by television (78.82%) and radio (73.43%). However , lowest 
(3.4%) percent farmers reported that their preferred ways to receive agrometeorological 
services through agriculture field level officials followed by miking (34.41%). 
 
Table 7.3: Preferred ways of receiving weather and climate forecasts 
Type of preferred ways Multiple response of farmers 
Number Percentage (%) 
Provide agricultural information through Television 804 78.82 
Provide agricultural information through radio 171 44.3 
SAAO should provide agricultural support to every 
farmers 749 73.43 
Agricultural officer should inform farmers 13 3.4 
Miking in every village 350 34.31 
Others SMS 925 90.68 
 
Findings of Qualitative Analysis 
 
Under qualitative data collection and analysis, 197 participants participated in 16 FGD 
meetings. On an average, more than 50% of farmers informed that forecasts especially 
rainfall and temperature were dependable. Forecast on cyclones, storm, drought, floods and 
flash floods were also dependable recently but farmers need crop specific and location-
based agro-meteorological forecast at least 15 days before. It would help farmers for making 
decision on what type of crops to be grown and type of management practices to be followed 
to protect the crop from the weather and climate risks . Presently they have received general 
weather and climate information which was not sufficient for farmers to make decision on 
crop protection. 
 
Over 70% of participants in all 16 FGDs informed that there is significant change in weather 
such as, rain, storm and high temperature compared to prior to last five years. Due to 
weather and climate change, they are incurring huge losses as they don't have crop and 
region-based weather forecast. Though they are trying to cope-up with the changes situation 
but they need services so that they can understand what to do which situation. With careful 
use of irrigation facilities, respondents are increasing cropping intensity and crop production 
with assistance of new crops.

DTCL Page-59 
Regional level data validation: Consultants organized and participated in five regional level 
data validation meeting at Satkhira, Naogaon, Rajshahi etc. and informed that DAE field 
level officials are presently providing weather and climate related information upon getting 
from this to the DAE head Quarter Field Service Wing. DAE quarter used to get this 
information from the Ministry of Agric ulture via BMD. It is general information which did not 
serve any purpose of farmers to make any decision of crop planning. Therefore , 
agrometeorological services and products are very much needed specially on region and 
crop-based so that farmers have eno ugh time to make a decision of cropping pattern, 
variety, management practices etc. UAO office used to record rainfall at their respective 
upazilas to provide data to the head quarter. More weather and climate related data is 
required for farmers which can designate through SMS, social media, digital display board 
and UNO and Union Parishad etc. 
 
Upazila level agricultural information: Enumerators and consultants interacted with all 16 
Upazila Agricultural Officers (UAOs) of the selected upazilas. UAOs and SAAOs assisted 
filed enumerators in data collection and interviewing respondents. Information like average 
temperature, average rainfall, and information on cyclone in last years, nature of drought and 
thunder storms in previous two years, salinity intrusion in last two years and deforestation in 
respective upazilas were provided by UAOs. Extent of damages by natural calamities in last 
two years was also provided by UAOs. It indicated that nature is changing and crops are 
affecting. Therefore , agro-meteorological services are time-bound requirement for the 
farmers which can be available through SMS/ Apps/Website and social media, TV, radio, 
display etc.

DTCL Page-60 
CHAPTER-8 
 
MAJOR FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
8.1 Major findings 
 
Major findings of the study are: 
 
 There was no existence of agro -meteorological framework for effective service 
delivery 
 There was no dissemination mechanism of weather and climate information 
 Presently farmers were not getting any agro -meteorological products, advisories or 
services other than weather and climate information 
 Farmers were getting weather and climate information fr om TV, Radio , DAE and 
mobile SMS. 
 Farmers were not happy enough of present weather and climate information provided 
by BMD, BWDB and DAE 
 Most farmers would like to get agro -met services through mobile SMS, Union 
Parishad Office, Upazila Agricultural Offic e of DAE, community people or extension 
batayan club, and electronic & social media in addition of TV and Radio. 
 Currently, farmers were not getting any seasonal variation forecast on temperature, 
rainfall & flood etc. This would helpful for them in crop production planning and 
management etc. 
 Farmers were interested to receive agro -meteorological products, advisories and 
services 
 Existing weather forecast was not enough to protect crop production from the 
damage caused due to natural calamities. 
 Sometimes farmers were getting meteorological information but not agro -met 
services 
 Current meteorological information was less effective as it was just a general 
information not agro-met services 
 Farmer needs at least 7-15 days' advance forecast information 
 Farmers had little knowledge about the r oles of BMD and BWDB regarding weather 
and climate as well flood related services 
 Farmers were currently planning their crop production based on past two year's 
weather forecast which was not reliable at all. 
 Farmer had no wait for weather forecast for deciding what type of crop will grow as 
there was no crop and region-based agro-meteorological forecast/services. 
 Farmer used to follow usual season for making decision for planting of crop. 
 Major weather and climate related p roblems in Kharif-1 season are diseases, insect 
pests in addition of salinity, thunder storm, drought and lightening while flood, flash 
flood, storm surge. 
 Major weather and climate related problems in Kharif -2 season were insect pest and 
diseases, flood, flood inundation, coastal flood, flash flood , salinity, storm surge 
thunderstorm, drought, cold-wave, heatwave, lightening, cyclone, forest degradation, 
etc. are minor 
 Major weather and climate related problems in Rabi (Boro) season are drought, cold-
wave, salinity etc. in addition of insect pests, diseases are the major problems while 
floods, storms and cyclone etc. are the minor problems 
 Crop damages due to weather and climatic problems were moderate where weather 
and climatic problems occurred at least 1 to 4 times during crop production 
 Past two years' major problems in the study districts are: insect pests attack, 
disease, flash flood, weed infestation, drought, cold-wave, thunderstorm, landslide, 
coastal flood, storm surge, cyclone, flood, flood inundate, and heatwave. 
 Average production loss was 20-100 kg in per acre land in the study area due to 
weather and climate problems

DTCL Page-61 
 Farmer present source of meteorological Information are TV, community people , 
radio, miking, mobile SMS, and social media. 
 Farmers ha d some extend knowledge about weather and climate and flood 
information providing agency but need more awareness campaign 
 Farmer's had no knowledge on agro -meteorological weather f orecast and cope -up 
techniques which were needed for coping-up the problem with the varietal change, 
changing of crop and adjustment of management practices 
 Farmer had not the opportunity to participate in any awareness campaign or training 
 Farmers were interested to participate training on region and crop-based weather 
and climate forecast, crop planning & management and irrigation management. 
 
8.2 Recommendations 
 
The following recommendations are made by the consultants based on the study findings; 
 
• Farmer needs agro -meteorological products/services or advisories in location-
specific (up to union) and crop-based so that they can take necessary meas ures to 
protect their crop from the weather and climate induced problems. 
 
• Agro-meteorological framework need to be formulated immediately for effective agro-
met service delivery 
 
• Need-based dissemination mechanism of weather and climate services should be 
developed 
 
• Farmer needs reliable seasonal variation data of temperature, rainfall, and flood etc. 
forecast 
 
• Advance forecast of agro-met services should be at least 7 to 1 5 days so that 
farmers can act to save damages 
 
• Agro-met services may be diss eminated by mobile SMS, digital display board at 
Union Parishad Office, Upazila Agricultural Office , community people or extension 
batayan club/IPM club, and electronic and social media. 
 
• Radio and TV should ha ve a predefined schedule and statio n/channel for weather 
forecast/agro-met services. 
 
• Weather and climate services mobile Apps and website should be developed for 
agro-met forecast 
 
• Awareness campaign and training on agro -met service may be organized for 
farmers, UAO, and community people for awareness and capacity building 
 
 
• Two-way feedback mechanism for weather and climate induced problems and 
solutions of farmers need to be introduced through SMS platform, call center/e -mail 
etc.

DTCL Page-62 
References 
 
• Project Appraisal Document (PAD) of Bangladesh Weather and Climate Services 
Regional Project (BWCSRP) financed by World Bank 
 
• Development Project Proforma (DPP) of Agro-meteorological Information System 
Development Project (AMISDP) 
 
• Practical Issues in Calculating the Sample Size for Studies, Daniel, 1999 
 
• Baseline survey report on Northwest Crop Diversification Project (NCDP) of DAE, 
2003-2008 
 
• Survey report on Second Crop Diversification Project (SCDP) of DAE 
 
• Study Report on Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project (IAPP) of Ministry of 
Agriculture 
 
• Technical proposal of the baseline survey to assess user satisfaction of agro -
meteorological advisories and products under AMISDP-DTCL. 
 
• Weather and climate related information at the w eb page of Bangladesh 
Meteorological Department (BMD) 
 
• Flood related information at the w ebpage of FFWC of Bangladesh Water 
Development Board (BWDB) 
 
• Crop seasons information from Krshi Diary of Agriculture Information System (AIS) 
 
• Webpage of Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institutes (BARI) 
 
• Webpage of Bangladesh Rice Research Institutes (BRRI) 
 
• Webpage of Bangladesh Jute Research Institutes (BJRI) 
 
• Webpage of Bangladesh Sugarcane Research Institutes (BSRI) 
 
• Farm holding statistics at Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS)