Agricultural Extension Manual
Chapter 11

CHAPTER 11
MASS MEDIA AND AUDIO VISUAL AIDS 
11.0 INTRODUCTION 
Mass media provides the opportunity to c ontact large numbers of farmers quickly at 
extremely low cost per farmer. Audio visual aids provide the opportunity to improve the 
quality of extension events. The extension methods covered in this section are: 
! radio; 
! newspapers; 
! print media and audio visual aids. 
Television is also an important mass media tool and sometimes extension staff may be 
interviewed as part of a television programme. However, agricultural television programmes 
are organised at national level, rather than regional, district or thana level. For this reason, 
television is not covered in detail in this Extension Manual. Where extension staff are 
required to appear on television Section 11.1 can be referred to as a guide for preparing 
interviews. 
11.1 RADIO
Most farmers now have access to radio in Bangl adesh, either owning a radio themselves or 
they are able to listen to one owned by a neighbour. Every day, Bangladesh Betar transmit 
over five hours of agricultural programmes, plus regular news items. Programmes are 
transmitted from six regional stations in Dhaka, Sylhet, Chittagong, Rajshahi, Khulna and 
Rangpur, and from the national station in Dhaka. The Department can tap into this valuable 
air time in order to reach a large number of farmers very quickly. In particular, radio is 
effective at: 
! spreading general awareness and creating an interest in farming innovations; 
! giving timely warning about possible pest and disease outbreaks, or urgent advice about 
action that could be taken; 
! facilitating farmer-to-farmer extension by broadcasting the success of farmers in one 
area to farmers in another; 
! advertising major forthcoming extension events such as district or thana fairs; 
! reinforcing and repeating extension messages that are also passed on at other extension 
events; 
! weather forecasting; 
! providing information about the prices and availability of inputs and market prices for 
outputs; 
! providing agricultural development informat ion from varied sources such as research 
scientists and sector specialists, who are not available for face-to-face extension events. 
Radio can also be effective when programmes are well made and are interesting to listen to, 
especially in the evenings in rural areas. Often, programmes can stimulate discussion and 
influence peoples attitudes to agriculture and innovations. 
One district specialist has been designated to each regional station. They have been trained 
in making radio programmes and have use of recording equipment. They are a good contact 
point for other thana, district or regional officers who want to broadcast information.

Headquarters
Departmental staff at headquarters work with Bangladesh Betar through the DAE Media Cell 
and the Agriculture Information Service. This is done by: 
! deciding DAE priorities for inclusion in radio programmes during Media Cell Working 
Group meetings, and providing these to AIS and Bangladesh Betar at their quarterly 
planning meetings; 
! providing training materials directly to Bangladesh Betar, which can be used to inform 
radio script preparation, or even submitting prepared scripts; 
! providing schedules of major extension events, and inviting Bangladesh Betar to attend 
and record these activities for later broadcast; 
! taking Bangladesh Betar staff to the field to enable them to record farmer interviews for 
later broadcast. 
Region 
Additional Directors (Region) are responsible for liaison with regional radio stations, 
Bangladesh Betar. This comprises: 
! attending regional Bangladesh Betar planning meetings; 
! providing copies of extension plans to B angladesh Betar so that they can a) advertise 
forthcoming events, and b) attend and record events; 
! providing copies of District Bulletins to Bangladesh Betar, including notes of the most 
important or urgent items of information which should be included in agricultural 
programmes over the next month; 
! inviting Bangladesh Betar to relevant meetings of the Agricultural Technical Committee 
at regional level and District Extension Planning Committee at district level. However, 
this may often only be possible in the districts where there is a Bangladesh Betar 
transmitter; 
! inviting or taking Bangladesh Betar staff to an extension event, or to record farmer 
interviews. 
If DAE staff are present where Bangladesh Betar are recording an extension event, or an 
interview with a farmer, or where they ar e being interviewed themselves, the following 
checklist will help ensure high quality programmes. 
GUIDE FOR RECORDED INTERVIEWS
Before recording:
! make sure everybody is aware of the purpose and the main learning points; 
! discuss the topic with all those involved before recording, especially in in terviews so that the
interviewee is not surprised during recording. 
During recording:
! make sure everybody remains relaxed and informal; 
! speak in everyday simple language , more in the s tyle o f a conversation than a lecture; 
! repea t main learning points carefully to help listeners understand;
! give specific examples, remembering that listeners will no t be able to see - they can only 
listen;
! ask short specific questi ons, using words such as What?, Why? and How?; 
! if relevant, suggest practical act ions t hat f armers can t ake.
After recording:
! try and find out when the progra mme will be broadcasted on radio; 
! encourage farmers to listen to radio progra mmes either individually or in groups.

District, Thana and Block 
Field staff may not have much influence over the content of radio programmes, but they can 
do much to stimulate learning about agricultural development from the radio. This can be 
done in a number of ways: 
! obtaining copies of radio programme schedules from Bangladesh Betar and providing 
these to farmers who have access to a radio to enable them to plan time to listen to 
programmes they may find interesting; 
! listening to agricultural broadcasts and expl aining new information with farmers who did 
not listen, or do not have access to a radio; 
! planning specific days and times to sit with a group of farmers and listen to radio 
programmes, and having a discussion about the technical content after the programme. 
Radio Listening Groups , or Radio Farm Forums can be highly effective, and groups of 
farmers can agree to meet each week to listen to a particular programme, answer each 
others questions, and plan activities they coul d implement on their farms. Extension staff 
can even motivate farmers to write to radio programmes with comments and questions, 
or ideas and innovations. This form of activity can also be encouraged in households 
with televisions for television programmes about agriculture. 
11.2 NEWSP APERS 
National and local newspapers are published across Bangladesh, and are widely read by 
rural people. Providing newspapers carry accura te and informative agricultural information 
they can present a cost-effective communication channel. 
The following tips can be used by extension staff to encourage newspapers to include 
agricultural information: 
! invite journalists to larger extension ev ents, for example, thana or district fairs; 
! invite journalists to important events such as the BS Awards Ceremony held as part of 
the Staff Appreciation Evening; 
! send copies of District Bulletins and other locally produced print media (leaflets and 
folders) to local newspapers; 
! provide copies of materials received from Headquarters to local journalists where 
appropriate; 
! send press releases to local newspapers, covering exciting new technologies, urgent 
problems and new developments; 
! maintain an informal relationship with the local paper. 
When encouraging newspapers to cover agricultural information, care should be taken so 
that: 
! they use the correct terminology. Comm on mistakes found in newspapers include articles 
which refer to the Department of Agricultural Extension as The Agricultural Extension 
Department or articles which suggest that DAE bring land back into production. This is 
not the case because farmers as land users bring land back into production; 
Encouraging Newspapers to Cover 
Agricultural Issues 
Quality Procedures for Press Releases

! they place agricultural extension in the context of the New Agricultural Extension Policy. 
For example, events and new ideas are developed on the basis of farmer needs. 
Copies of printed articles and press releases can be retained in the office for future 
reference. These can be kept in a Press Cuttings file. 
11.3 PR INT MEDIA AND AUDIO V ISUA L A IDS
Print media and audio visual aids are used to contact large numbers of people and add to 
the quality and impact of extension events in many ways, some of which are described 
below. 
Awareness: Print media items produced in large numbers for display in public places, or 
widespread distribution to people, can create awareness of new ideas, problems such as 
pest outbreak, or actions that farmers may need to take urgently. 
Interest: Print media and audio visual aids can add interest to extension events, as they use 
pictures and sometimes sound. Peoples interest and attention is likely to be higher when 
extension events use flash cards, photographs and samples. 
Memory: When information is presented in a variety of formats, people are more likely to 
remember important points. So, using touch, vision and hearing often works better than only 
listening to somebody talking. 
Explanation: Using charts and pictures often helps extension agents to explain ideas and 
concepts more clearly and simply, so that participants in extension events are more likely to 
understand. 
Effects: Photographs, models and flip charts give extension staff the opportunity to show 
what might happen if a farmer adopts a new idea. For example, a photograph of fish being 
produced in a rice field will give farmers a clear idea of what rice-fish production may entail. 
Making a model of a rice-fish field using mud and water enables farmers to see how a field 
may need to be constructed. Again, this is much more interactive and interesting than a 
simple talk. 
Structure: Print media and audio visual aids help extension agents to structure talks and 
events. For example, a set of overhead transparencie s, or a series of slides, or a set of flash 
cards provide key points to cover in a talk, or give structure to an event. 
Participation: Using live samples, models, photographs, flip charts, flash cards and other 
print media or audio visual aids can help an extension agent gain farmer participation in 
extension events. Farmers can discover for them selves how to build and fill a rice-fish field 
by making a model. Householders can examine issues related to sanitation and water 
supply with a well structured set of pictorial flash cards. Farmers may also bring real 
examples (e.g. damaged crops) to an extension event giving the event more immediacy and 
impact. 
A point to remember: mass media such as newspapers, print media such as leaflets 
and posters, and audio-visual aids, often make use of diagrams, pictures and symbols 
in addition to the written word. This is to make material more interesting and easier to 
understand. However, a note of caution - different people understand different 
pictures and different symbols in different ways. This is known as visual literacy - 
people learn what pictures mean. It is important that the right pictures and symbols 
are used.

The remainder of this Chapter describes the following print media and audio visual aids: 
! real objects and live or preserved samples; 
! chalkboards and whiteboards; 
! flip charts; 
! flash cards; 
! photographs; 
! slides; 
! overhead projectors; 
! posters; 
! leaflets and folders. 
Real objects and live samples include many items such as: tools, crops, seeds, fertilisers, 
plants, prepared food, equipment, and insects. They are best used in extension events with 
an individual farmer or a group of no more than about 20 farmers, so that everybody can 
see, touch or use the object or sample. 
Preparation
Extension event topics are decided on the basis of farmer needs. Once a topic is defined, 
objects or live samples can be selected. Wher e possible, those which are already available 
are used. For example, those kept in the district or thana Resource Centre.
The selected object or sample should convey precisely and clearly part of the topic. For 
example, if the topic is Integrated Pe st Management, and samples of crops damaged by 
pests are required, the damage should be sufficient so that it can be seen, and the damage 
should be attributed to a particular pest. Where there are a larger group of farmers, a 
number of samples or objects can be used so that everybody can see them. If chemicals 
are used they should be stored and handled safely. Safety instructions should always be 
followed. Examples of items which could be collected over time and stored in the Resource 
Centre for use in various extension events are: 
! vegetables and crops from different districts; 
! seed and sheaves of grain grown locally; 
! fertilisers used locally, or commercial protein concentrates, or other chemicals; 
! ingredients to use in home prepared feed mixtures; 
! materials for treating seeds, or containers for storing seeds; 
! plants with and without common diseases to enable comparison; 
! samples of local soils; 
! tools and equipment, these could also be borrowed from farmers or dealers; 
! collection of insect pests which are common to the area, preserved in jars of alcohol (for 
caterpillars, borers, etc.) or pinned to cork in display boxes (for moths, beetles, etc.); 
! collection of weeds, pressed, dried and mounted on card; 
! collection of machinery parts (from pumps, engines, or sprayers) which have been 
dismantled and cleaned. 
Many of these items will need some form of preservation. 
Real Objects and Live Samples

Using Real Objects and Live Samples 
During an extension event, samples or objects can be used in a number of ways: 
To explain an important learning point: the object or sample can be held up so that 
participants can see it, and its significance explained. 
To gain farmer participation: objects or samples can be passed around participants, for 
their comments. Questions to help participation could include: What is wrong with this crop 
sample?, or What is this tool used for? or How much of this seed would you use in your 
field? or Which of these insects is beneficial?. 
To use: objects or samples can be used to demonstrate something in practice. For 
example, participants can be shown how to use a maize sheller, or how to apply a fertiliser, 
or how to use a budding knife. Used in this way, real objects and live samples can help in 
running method demonstrations , which are described in Chapter 10 .
Chalkboards and whiteboards are best used in extension events with up to about 20 
participants (either farmers or DAE staff). 
The following tips may be useful when using chalkboards and whiteboards: 
! the board should be thoroughly cleaned and in a stable position; 
! it should be placed in a place so that all participants can see it clearly; 
! large writing and simple short phrases or words should be used; 
! the facilitator should stand at the side of the board; 
! the facilitator should avoid talking whilst writing on the board; 
! colour can be used to emphasise important words. 
The board can be used to: 
Stimulate participation: Participants questions can be written on the board, showing that 
their ideas are important. For example, What are the most important principles and 
activities associated with IPM? Boards can also be used to help participants plan, for 
example, by brainstorming things that farmer s can do after an extension event. Participants 
can be asked to call out their ideas, which the extension agent then writes down. 
Brainstorming type questions include What main problems do you have implementing 
IPM?, or What extension events shall we plan to follow-up this method demonstration? 
Brainstorming questions are usually open ended to encourage discussion. 
Summarise key points: Extension staff using a board during a talk or presentation can 
write key words or phrases on the board as a prompt, and to help participants remember the 
main learning points. 
Draw simple pictures and diagrams: A picture or diagram can often summarise many 
words. Pictures or diagrams on boards should be large and clear, and use several colours. 
They can be built up slowly, with a brief explanat ion at each stage. For example, a drawing 
of a rice-fish field can be made, showing key stages in construction and management. 
Chalkboards and Whiteboards

Flip chart paper comes as large sheets of cheap paper. It can be fixed to a chalkboard, 
whiteboard or flip chart stand. It is best used to support group extension events, where there 
are about 20 participants. Flip chart paper is useful for summarising main headings in a talk, 
brainstorming, noting questions, or drawing simple pictures and diagrams. The advantage of 
flip chart paper is that text and drawings can be prepared in advance, paper and pens can 
be given to participants for them to write their own ideas; and used flip chart paper can be 
taken away for future use in other events or can be kept as a record. 
Preparation
Supplies of flip chart paper, and marker pens, should be kept in the district or thana 
Resource Centre. Depending on the intended use Flip Charts can be prepared in different 
ways:
As a prepared presentation: in this case, text and drawings should be prepared in 
advance before the extension event. Text should be is big enough - a minimum of 2 inches - 
to read, and drawings clear enough. Several strong contrasting colours, such as blue, black 
and red can be used to make the presentation more attractive or highlight key points. When 
used as a prepared presentation, each sheet of paper should show a different picture or 
subject. This helps extension staff remember the structure of the event, and helps 
participants understand the topic. 
As a means of facilitating participation where blank sheets are used in a similar way 
to Whiteboards: paper is fixed to a board at the front of a group for a brainstorming session. 
The extension agent uses the paper to write participants ideas. 
Using Flip Charts 
The following tips are useful for using flip charts for prepared presentations: 
! the flip chart stand with the prepared flip chart paper should be placed in a position 
where all participants can see it clearly; 
! the facilitator should avoid turning their back to participants; 
! the facilitator should try to stand at the side of the board; 
! the facilitator should turn over each page as the topic is covered. 
The following tips are useful for using flipchart paper when brainstorming: 
! participants are asked clear open ended questions; 
! responses are recorded accurately and simply to summarise the participants ideas; 
! large letters and simple short phrases should be used. 
Group Work using Flip Chart Paper 
During an extension event when flip chart paper and pens are given to participants, the 
extension agent will need to be more of a facilitator than a trainer. The following tips are 
useful: 
! clear guidance should be given to the parti cipants on what they should consider and 
write, and how long they have. For example, During the next 10 minutes write down all 
the difficulties you face in using green manur e crops, or During the next hour prepare a 
plan to introduce Integrated Pest Management to your farm; 
Flip Charts

! participants can use simple pictures. For example, instead of writing pest and disease, 
they could draw a stick insect, or instead of writing bird perch, they could draw a simple 
bird on a stick; 
! group work can be considered. For example, 20 participants can be divided into four 
smaller groups of five people. This gives a better opportunity for participation. In each 
group, one person should be nominated to record the group ideas on the flip chart paper, 
and perhaps another to present the groups ideas to the rest of the participants; 
! while participants are talking to one another and writing ideas or drawing pictures, the 
facilitator should go round and see what they are doing, ask questions to clarify thoughts 
and provide guidance where necessary; 
! both sides of the flip chart paper should be used to save resources; 
! participants can keep their pieces of paper as a record of their discussion or agreements. 
Flash cards are visual aids which can be used to promote thought and generate discussion 
on a particular subject, particularly amongst sma ll groups of farmers. They are usually very 
simple illustrations which have been drawn onto small pieces of card. They can be used in a 
number of ways. For example: 
! to show single images to promote discussion on a particular topic e.g. a healthy tomato 
plant; 
! to illustrate more complex scenes such as the uses of a village pond or a homestead 
scene to help structure a discussion session; 
! a series of cards can be used to illustrate a story which includes important information 
about a particular subject or raises important issues for discussion; 
! they can also be used to reinforce training. Quickly showing a card can help people see 
a connection between an idea and an image. 
Because they are so simple they are a very good field tool. They are relatively cheap, can 
be produced locally (in most cases can be prepar ed by the person who will use them), they 
can be replaced easily if they become dam aged, they can be easily carried to group 
meetings in villages and can be designed to suit particular target groups. Their simple 
design means that they are not joined together and are flexible i.e. they can be passed 
around group members for individuals to have a closer look or they can be displayed in a 
place where the group can gather round to look at. 
Preparation
The type of extension event will determine how flash cards are designed. It may be that sets 
of cards are developed for different events and target groups. The easiest way to design 
flash cards is to: 
! think about the subject and the target group and relate these to any key points that 
should be emphasised or will form the basis of a good discussion; 
! list these points and decide what types of simple pictures could be used to illustrate 
them;
! decide whether the cards are going to be used as a sequence (e.g. as a story or as a 
way of showing a process). If so, decide on the sequence and think about pictures 
which will easily illustrate each step in the sequence; 
! depending on the topic and the number of discu ssion points decide how many cards are 
needed; 
! design the cards. This will involve either drawing or copying a simple illustration on each 
card. Drawings should not be complicated. In fact the simpler the picture the easier it is 
Flash Cards

for people to understand. Artistic skills are not as important as showing a simple image 
which can be easing understood. The Image Bank keeps a good selection of pictures 
which can be copied or traced easily. Pictures should be as attractive as possible by 
using colour and avoiding text; 
! flash cards do not need to be much bigger than A4 as they are likely to be held by the 
facilitator, passed around the participants or used as a focus point for the group to gather 
round and examine; 
! cards should be shown to people before they are used to see whether they are easily 
understood. 
Once flash cards have been prepared, they can be used again for other group meetings and 
can also be shared with other extension partners. 
Using Flash Cards 
Flash cards are usually used to enhance and stimulate group discussion. Some tips for 
using cards include: 
! if the cards are to be used in sequence they should be checked to make sure they are in 
order and that the set is complete before the group meeting. It may help if the cards are 
numbered on the back; 
! the facilitator should ensure that the whole group can see the cards clearly. The best 
seating arrangement is probably in a circle on mats rather than chairs. If cards are used 
in sequence they should be held in front of the body at a level which everybody can see 
comfortably without straining. The cards can be held slightly to one side of the body to 
enable the facilitator to glance at the pictures. This may help them remember that all 
points for discussion are covered during the meeting. Key points can also be written on 
the back of each card to prompt discussion; 
! cards can be passed around the group members or placed on the ground in the centre of 
the group; 
! the role of the facilitator is to encourage discussion amongst the group so care should be 
taken not to use the cards as a way of stimulating a lecture. To encourage discussion 
group members can be asked general questions about what they can see or whether 
there is anything new in the pictures. If a picture shows people doing things in it 
participants can be asked questions about why they think things are being done in a 
certain way. Questions can also be used to lead farmers to make comparisons with the 
way they do certain things. This may help the group to analyse the benefits of new ideas 
for themselves. The group can also be as ked to make comparisons between two 
pictures e.g. a picture of a healthy crop and a picture of a poor yielding crop; 
! avoid complacency. The facilitator will know the order or sequence of the cards. It is 
important not to prompt the discussion groups too often. Free and active listening should 
be encouraged at all times; 
! the facilitator should not be afraid to spend longer on one card than others if the group 
have found a particular point for discussion.

Photographs can also be used to illustrate points for discussion. The advantage of 
photographs is that they are real pictures. However, they are expensive to produce and 
replace if they become damaged. One way to use them which protects them and makes 
them potentially available to large audiences is to organise and mount them as displays. If 
displays are clearly laid out they can be a useful mechanism for stimulating thought and, if 
accessible, can also stimulate informal discussion. 
Photographs can also be used to illustrate printed material e.g. in District Bulletins, training 
handouts or posters. 
Preparation
When taking photographs try to think about their end use. For example, black and white 
photographs are better for printed material whilst colour photos make better pictures for 
displays, posters and slides. After photographs have been chosen it is useful to write some 
key information on the back. This should include what the photo is about, where it was 
taken and when it was taken. 
Here are some basic suggestions to help make the best use of photographs as a resource or 
support material. 
For Displays: 
! use a clean background for the display. For example, a board covered in plain paper; 
! select the best photographs for the display and arrange them on the background in a 
logical order; 
! avoid using too many photographs, people generally take in more information if it is 
arranged in a simple and attractive way; 
! captions can be added to explain the main points of each photograph. If captions are 
used they should be simple avoiding the use of words or terms which farmers may not 
understand; 
! check the height of the display so that people can see the pictures without straining. 
As pictures for printed material (e.g. handouts, leaflets or posters): 
! think about what the photograph will look like once it has been copied. For example, 
does it contain too much detail? Will it copy well or will it be too dark? 
! selecting the right photo for printed material is as important as taking the photo so 
always try to match the best photographs with the message to be conveyed in the text; 
! if a caption is required simple Bangla that can be understood by the intended audience 
should be used. 
Using Photographs 
Photographs can be used in numerous ways. For example, they can be used to: 
! show farmers or visitors what ext ension staff have been doing. For example, 
photographs can be displayed to show farmer s a real example of an activity being 
promoted at a Thana fair; 
! stimulate discussion on a particular techno logy. For example, loose photographs can be 
passed around participants in training sessions; 
! illustrate a publication. For example, photographs can be used in bulletins, leaflets, or 
posters; 
! illustrate a time sequence. For example, a series of photos taken of the same crop at 
one month intervals throughout a season. 
Photographs

Slide projectors allow the projection of photographic pictures, captions and diagrams which 
have been produced with an ordinary camera using a special slide film. The main 
advantage of the slide projector is that it shows 'real' pictures. By comparison to drawings or 
diagrams, real pictures are usually more interesting, often easier to understand, and can 
usually show more detail. However, they are costly to produce and, if good quality pictures 
are wanted, some photographic skills are required. 
Preparation
The topic of the extension event will determine what slides can be used. Over a period of 
time, a range of sets of slides can be developed and kept in the district and thana Resource 
Centres. Districts have cameras which should be used to produce slides and slide sets. 
Also, headquarters send out copies of slide sets from time to time. These should also be 
kept in the resource centre. Examples of slide sets that would be sensible to develop and 
keep for use are: 
! various symptoms of diseases; 
! types of diseases and insects; 
! water management activities; 
! steps in the production of different crops; 
! steps in the harvesting, storage and processing of different crops; 
! agricultural machinery, care, use and maintenance. 
There are many other examples. Usually a room of 25 to 30 participants is enough for a 
successful slide show. 
Using Slides 
The following tips should help make a slide show successful: 
! slides should be checked before they are shown to make sure that they are in the correct 
order. The first slide should be at the front of the tray. The order can be written on the 
frames using Overhead Projector pens; 
! slides should be the correct way up. To do this they should be put in the tray up-side- 
down. Once they have been checked a line can be drawn using a permanent pen along 
the edge of the slides. This will help make sure that the slides are always in the correct 
position; 
! participants should be able to see the projection clearly. The darker the room, the easier 
this is; 
! participants should be able to understand what they are seeing. Most people need at 
least 10 seconds to take in the details of a picture. Each slide should be explained and 
time given to allow the audience to ask questions; 
! slides are easily damaged by dust or finger-pri nts. They should be held by the frame to 
avoid touching the picture. Slides should be st ored in their original boxes or kept together 
by rubber bands inside plastic bags; 
! slides can be difficult to identify once they are stored. The box or the bag they are kept in 
should be labelled. To help find slides easily a file of index lists can be kept in the 
Resource Centre; 
! if slides are borrowed they should be returned to their original box or bag so that they can 
be used by other trainers. 
Slides

The overhead projector is an excellent visual aid for use in a group extension event. The 
audience can see the extension agent's face during use, it uses colour, and presentations 
can be prepared beforehand. However, the acetates and pens are expensive, electricity is 
required and the equipment is bulky. 
Preparation
The overhead projector, acetates and pens should be stored safely in the office, preferably 
in the Resource Centre . It is important to keep the projector clean and free from dust. 
When being stored, the projection mirror should be tilted downward and the machine 
covered with a large cloth. When necessary, the mirror and projection stage should be 
cleaned with a soft cloth. A supply of spare bulbs should also be kept. Overhead projectors 
can be used either as a: 
! prepared presentation; or as a 
! means of facilitating participation. 
As a prepared presentation: Text and drawings should be prepared in advance before the 
extension event on acetate sheets. The text should be big enough to read, and drawings 
simple and clear. Strong colours, such as blue, black and red should be used so that the 
image can be seen clearly by the participants. When used as a prepared presentation, each 
acetate should show a different picture or subject. It helps extension staff remember the 
structure of the event, and helps participants understand the topic. Acetates prepared in 
advance should not use more than 12 lines of text on each sheet, and letters should be no 
smaller than 1 cm (0.4 inch). Text should not be too close to the borders of the acetate 
sheet because this makes it difficult to project. Because acetates are transparent, it is easy 
to copy illustrations from books. Fine pens should be used when copying details. The 
Image Bank is an invaluable source of pictures for preparing acetates in advance. After use, 
prepared presentations can be stored in the resource centre for someone else to use. 
As a means of facilitating participation: Blank acetate sheets and pens are required. 
Participants could be asked questions during an event, and the overhead projector used to 
record their answers or ideas. Brainstorming sessions can also be recorded. In this way 
acetate sheets provide an accurate summary of what was discussed and decided. 
Whenever acetates are used, the correct pens should be chosen. Permanent pens should 
be used when drawings or text are needed again. Non-permanent should be used if 
acetates are likely to be re-used. However, permanent acetates can be cleaned if kerosene 
is used. The Overhead projector display screen should never be used to write on. 
Using Overhead Projectors 
The following tips will help get the best results from the overhead projector when used in an 
extension event. 
! the facilitator should stand to one side of the overhead projector and point to the items 
on the projection stage, not on the screen. This gives the participants a better view; 
! text or diagrams should be revealed gradually by masking parts of the acetate with a 
sheet of paper. This allows subjects to be explained step-by-step; 
! using overlays (acetates placed on top of each other) helps to build up diagrams, or 
illustrate the stages in carrying out an activity. Prepared answers to a set of questions 
can also be displayed in this way; 
! the facilitator should use a pencil as a pointer to draw attention to key points; 
! after use, the overhead projector should be allowed to cool down. It should not be 
moved whilst the bulb is still hot. 
Overhead Projector

Posters are usually large pieces of paper which display a simple message for potentially 
large numbers of people. They can be used to advertise or publicise a forthcoming 
extension event or communicate simple technol ogies or information. They are usually stand 
alone i.e. able to generate interest without requiring additional information. Ideally they 
should: 
! be colourful and attractive; 
! be displayed in an accessible place e.g. market area, or community meeting point; 
! be simple whilst containing all necessary information; 
! have DAE as a contact point. 
Preparation
The following tips may be useful: 
! the design should be simple and attractive; 
! if posters are to be used as a means of communicating a simple message (e.g. rat 
control) then the image selected should be easily recognisable; 
! if words are used they should be kept to a minimum, simple, and the lettering should be 
large and clearly visible; 
! the design should be shown to other people before printing to check whether it is easily 
understood; 
! if posters are to be used to publicise an extension event then all the necessary 
information about the event should be included (e.g. date, place, time, venue and 
subject); 
! diagrams or drawings can be copied from books or the image bank; 
! photographs should be avoided unless the poster is being made by a professional 
printing company. 
Whilst posters can be produced locally, t hey can also be designed and prepared by the 
Media Cell for more national campaigns such as the promotion of the NAEP. The Media 
Cell will also consider any media requests submitted by Districts. 
Using Posters 
As posters are mainly used for generating awareness about a particular event or technology 
the most important decision to make is for where they should be displayed. They should be 
displayed in public places which are either ac cessible for all members of the community or 
specific places where certain target groups congregate. For example, bazaars, meeting 
places, clinics, or schools. 
The area around where the poster is displayed should be clear to ensure that the message 
will stand out. Posters should be displayed at a suitable height so that most people can see 
them.
Leaflets and folders are printed papers which provide notes on the subject matter of a 
lecture or demonstration, or a topic of special or urgent interest. They are useful reference 
materials for people to keep. By using t hem during extension events participants do not 
need to make notes. Leaflets and folders can be particularly useful in providing details of 
Posters
Leaflets and Folders

extension messages, by helping participants to remember specific information about names 
of varieties, time of sowing, spacing or fertiliser doses. 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN LEAFLE TS A ND PO STER S
Leaflets One small sheet of paper printed on both sides, often A5. 
Folders One larger sheet of paper, printed on both sides and folded, often A4. 
Preparation
Subject matter for leaflets and folders will be determined by the results of Farmer Information 
Needs Assessment (FINA), and the context in which they will be used. They are either 
distributed during an extension event, in which case they are likely to reflect the content on 
the event, or they are distributed outside an event. 
Distribution in an extension event: printed materials can be supplied to farmers as part of 
an extension event such as a field day, formal training day or motivational tour. In this 
context, the subject of the leaflet or folder compliments and reinforces the main points in the 
event.
Distribution outside an extension event: printed materials can be supplied to farmers in 
markets, through schools, dealers, or through other means which do not depend on the 
farmer attending a DAE extension event. In this case, the leaflet or folder is the only item of 
information the farmer has. Materials used in this context are usually part of a local mass 
media campaign, and raise general awareness about a new idea, urgent problem, or 
suggest urgent action that farmers could take. Examples might include an outbreak of pests 
or diseases. 
The following tips may be useful when preparing leaflets and folders: 
! the leaflet or folder should only contain main points. However, full details of facts and 
figures which may be difficult to remember should be provided e.g. application rates, 
costs, names of chemical, calculations; 
! they should be structured. This can be done by using lists, headings, under-lining, etc. 
Simple designs help farmers use the material for future reference; 
! only words which will be understood by farmers should be used. Difficult technical terms 
should be avoided whilst the use of local names for crops, equipment, etc. should be 
encouraged; 
! measurements should be given in local units (e.g. acres and maunds instead of hectares 
and tonnes); 
! diagrams and drawings should be included where possible. These can easily be copied 
from books and the Image Bank .
Using Leaflets and Folders 
Once printed, leaflets and folders should be distributed. This may be to participants at a 
group extension event, or to the general farmi ng public. They can be given to market traders 
or dealers or shops to distribute. A follow up visit a few weeks later will enable field staff to 
estimate how many were distributed and to whom.