CHAPTER 12
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
12.0 INTRODUCTION 
In extension, objectives are based on meeti ng farmers information needs. Success occurs 
when objectives are met, and indicators are used to help determine the level of success. 
Monitoring is the process of recording these indicators, while evaluation is analysing the 
recorded indicators and determining how to improve performance in the future. Using 
monitoring and evaluation tools DAE is able to ensure that the implementation of extension 
programmes follows their design and takes into account the interests of farmers. 
Effective monitoring and evaluation should provide relevant and accurate information, to the 
right people, at the right time, in the right format, to enable them to take timely decisions and 
action. Decentralisation provides local fl exibility and freedom of choice, and monitoring and 
evaluation helps staff make the right choices. 
In DAE monitoring is conducted during implem entation and evaluation is usually conducted 
after implementation. Monitoring comes first because without collecting information a valid 
evaluation cannot be made. However, monitoring will only produce its full benefits if the 
collected information is reviewed to learn lessons. This is evaluation. Information for 
planning extension programmes comes from both evaluation and farmer information needs 
assessment - the absence of either source of information will lead to low quality planning. 
In the planning process, monitoring and evaluation are tools to help managers in thanas and 
districts improve their performance. Ext ension monitoring and evaluation are self- 
assessment processes which should be carried out by thana and district staff. 
There are two kinds of monitoring and evaluati on that are important in ensuring effective 
extension services: assessment of outcome and assessment of process .
This chapter discusses assessment of DAEs successes in meeting the needs of farmers, 
and shows the appropriateness of each District and Thanas annual extension plan. This 
assessment of outcome is accomplished through the review of BS Diaries, the Seasonal 
Extension Monitoring System (SEMS) and the Knowledge, Attitude, Practice (KAP) survey 
system. 
Chapter 2 discusses assessment of the successes of Districts, Thanas, and on an individual 
basis Block Supervisors, in achieving their work plans i.e. implementing their annual 
extension plan. This assessment process is accomplished through the conduct of Technical 
Audits and the Work Programming System. 
12.1 T HE BLO CK SUPE RVISORS DIAR Y
The Block Supervisors diary is one of the most important tools used in operating DAEs 
extension approach, and can be used to support monitoring and evaluation. During the day 
to day work of the Block Supervisor, the diary acts as a recording tool and should show what 
is done, with whom, and what the response was. Farmer problems are recorded, farmers 
names listed, and farmers reactions to participat ing in events are noted - especially in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Plannin g Process

case of individual farm visits. The diary is an important source of detailed block level 
information about what is working well, and why, and what is not working well and why. 
12.2 T HE SEASONAL EXTENSION MONITO RING SYSTEM (SEM S)
The Seasonal Extension Monitoring System (S EMS) is designed to help extension staff 
record indicators of the performance of extension programmes, and to summarise and 
interpret this information in order to help make future planning decisions. 
The following primary indicators are included in SEMS. 
Contact: How many farmers (male and female, la rge and small) attended extension events, 
and what was the cost per farmer. 
Understanding: How many farmers who attended understood the ideas (technologies) 
contained in the extension event, and what was the cost per farmer who understood. 
Testing: How many of the farmers who attended think that they will try the ideas 
(technologies) contained in the extension event, and what is the cost per farmer who intends 
to test. 
These are the primary indicators of the performance of extension programmes. They should 
occur in sequence based on the assumption that contact leads to understanding, which 
leads to testing. 
Monitoring and evaluation helps to make better management decisions. The management 
decisions which can be made with the help of SEMS are: 
Technology Selection: What agricultural innovations should be included in extension 
programmes. 
Method Selection: Which extension methods should be included in extension programmes. 
Area Selection: Which areas (specific thanas, districts or regions) should be supported or 
supervised more closely. 
SEMS should show which technologies are most or least successful, which extension 
methods are the most or least successful, and which areas are running the most or least 
successful extension programmes. On the basis of the information, many decisions can be 
made and actions taken to continually improve the extension service offered to farmers. 
Listed below are some of the actions that can be taken to improve low performing 
technologies, extension methods or areas. 
Poor Technologies: 
! adjust the technology, with help from res earch staff and the farmers who have tested; 
! change the extension method - for example, use group training rather than result 
demonstrations; 
Indicators Used in SEMS 
Decisions Made Using SEMS Indicators

! improve the extension events - use better pub licity, hold events at more suitable times, 
use more appropriate venues; 
! reduce the budget and resources for the technology in the next extension programme. 
Poor Methods: 
! adjust the extension method; 
! train staff to implement the method more effectively; 
! reduce the number of events of this type in the next extension programme; 
! use the extension method in combination with other extension methods - for example, 
add more field days to result demonstrations; 
! delete the extension method from future extension programmes. 
Poor Area:
! organise extra training for the staff in this area; 
! increase the frequency of supervision visits to this area, including the use of Technical 
Audits; 
! provide more advice on the selection of technologies and extension methods for 
inclusion in programmes; 
! reduce the budget for this area, reducing the size of the programme until performance 
improves.
SEMS information about contact, understanding and testing also help improve the quality of 
extension programmes. Where contact, understanding or testing is low, the following 
actions can be taken: 
Low Contact:
! offer more interesting technologies; 
! improve publicity to attract more farmers to events; 
! hold events at appropriate times; 
! review the selection of groups used for this activity; 
! hold events in appropriate places. 
Low Understanding: 
! improve the way in which new ideas are presented - for example, use simple language, 
visual aids, live specimens; 
! train staff in implementing extension events; 
! train staff in facilitation skills; 
! use alternative extension events - for example, rather than Thana Training Days, use 
more village level group meetings. 
Low Testing: 
! improve the quality of extension events at which the particular technology is discussed; 
! adjust the technology, with the help of research staff and feedback from farmers, to 
make it more appropriate to farmers needs and conditions. 
The decisions that are taken will depend on the type of farmers involved. For example, 
when changing the timing or location of extens ion events, consideration should be given to 
whether the target group are male or female, as they may have different preferences for 
timing and venue. Decisions about corrective action can be made with the help of additional 
items of information which are collected in SEMS - secondary indicators . A selection 
includes:

Extension Methods: 
! publicity effectiveness; 
! timeliness of event; 
! accessibility. 
Technology: 
! profitability, or cost-benefit analysis; 
! risk; 
! initial capital requirement; 
! labour requirement. 
SEMS also allows extension staff to record farmers specific stated reasons for not wishing to 
test a new innovation. There is a limit to the number of secondary indicators that can be 
gathered, as this is time-consuming and complicated. However, some basic indicators of 
extension event quality such as timing, venue and publicity are included in the system to 
give an idea of problem areas. 
The Seasonal Extension Monitoring System applie s to all DAE activities, irrespective of 
project or source of funds. There are four SEMS forms, SEMS Forms 1, 2, 3, and 4. SEMS 
Forms 2, 3 and 4 are usually prepared by computer from the data recorded in SEMS Forms 
1. The Thana Agricultural Officer can also manually prepare and send one SEMS 2, one 
SEMS 3 and one SEMS 4 summary to the Deputy Director, District. However, this is not 
mandatory.
SEMS Form 1: Primary Extension Event Monitoring Form 
SEMS Form 1 is a single form which is used for any extension event. Each Block 
Supervisor , or the senior DAE officer responsible for implementing the activity, is 
responsible for completing one SEMS Form 1 for each activity in the block, irrespective of 
source of funds. Thana staff are responsible for completing a SEMS Form 1 for thana level 
events such as the Thana Fair, or Thana Training Days. Likewise, District staff are 
responsible for completing SEMS Form 1 for each activity at District level such as District 
Training Days. 
During the season, each week and month all of the SEMS Form 1s are brought to the Thana 
office. In every case SEMS 1 must be finalised on the spot , at the time the extension 
event takes place so that the following indicators can be recorded: 
! contact - the numbers of farmers who attended; 
! understanding - the number of farmers who think they know how to use the technology; 
and 
! testing - the number of farmers who think they will try the new technology. 
Other parts of the form such as location, collaborating organisation, crop code, AEZ number, 
date plot established etc. should be completed before the extension event takes place. By 
completing parts of the form early, field staff actually begin making a plan of the event which 
gradually becomes complete as the stages of the event take place. 
Detailed guidelines for completing SEMS Form 1 are shown in Annex XI , Table 1 (a) .
SEMS Form 1 is shown in Annex XI , Table 1 (b) .
SEMS Form 2: Technology Summary Form 
Completing SEMS Forms

SEMS Form 2 is a single form which is used to summarise information about extension 
events which concern the same technology. For example, all extension events dealing with 
the use of balanced fertiliser in rice production would be summarised on SEMS Form 2. 
They can be completed manually but are usually gener ated by computer at District Offices. If 
they are completed manually then it is the Thana Agricultural Officer who is responsible for 
ensuring that one SEMS Form 2 is prepared for each of the technologies conducted and 
ensuring that as a minimum those sections of the form relating to contact, understanding and 
testing are completed. 
SEMS Form 2 enable start to compare and make choices about the least and most 
successful technologies. At the end of the season, all SEMS Form 1s are collected and 
sorted into piles, one pile for each technology, and average indicators calculated. Detailed 
guidelines for completing SEMS Form 2 are given in Annex XI , Table 2 (a) . SEMS Form 2 
is shown in Annex XI , Table 2 (b) .
When each SEMS Form 2 is completed, it is possible to assess the performance of a 
technology. It is also possible to compare te chnologies. For example, where the proportion 
of farmers intending to test a technology falls below 25 per cent, there may be a problem. 
Care should be taken where a technology has been promoted primarily through mass 
extension methods such as folk songs or dramas, high proportions of farmers willing to test 
new ideas should not be expected. This is because mass extension methods are most 
suited to raising farmers awareness about new ideas, but do not provide enough information 
to enable farmers to apply the ideas or technology. 
Where it is decided that action to improve technology performance is required, refer to the 
options that may be taken outlined in the earlier section on using indicators to make 
decisions. 
SEMS Form 3: Extension Event Summary Form 
SEMS Form 3 is used to summarise information about particular extension methods used 
during the season. There should be one SEMS 3 summary form for each extension method 
- one for result demonstrations (which summarises all result demonstrations, of all types of 
technology), one for thana training days (which summarises all thana training days), and so 
on. If completed manually then a SEMS Form 3 for each different extension method used in 
a thana during an extension programme should be completed by thana staff at the end of the 
season. All SEMS Form 1s should be collected, and sorted into piles, one for each 
extension event, and average indicators calculated. Detailed guidelines for completing 
SEMS Form 3 are shown in Annex XI , Table 3 (a) . SEMS Form 3 is shown in Annex XI ,
Table 3 (b) .
SEMS Form 3 can also be generated by the computers at district offices, providing the in- 
charge SEMS officer has received all SEMS 1 Forms from every thana and they have been 
entered onto the SEMS software. 
When all SEMS Form 3 have been completed, it is possible to assess the performance of 
extension methods, and to compare methods. For example, where the proportion of 
attending farmers who understand the technical cont ent in any face to face extension event 
falls below 50 per cent, this may indicate a problem. 
Care should be taken as different extension methods have different impacts - for example, 
field days will provide more detailed inform ation than folk drama events, and levels of 
understanding and testing are bound to be higher. Where it is decided that action to improve 
technology performance is required, possible dec isions that can be made are outlined in the 
earlier section on using indicators.

SEMS Form 4: Extension Area Summary Form 
Extension activities are conducted in differ ent blocks, thanas, districts and regions. SEMS 
Form 4 summarises the performance of extension programmes in these areas. SEMS Form 
4 should be completed for each thana, each district and each region. SEMS Form 4 could 
also be completed for the whole country to summarise performance across Bangladesh. At 
the end of each season, thana level staff should complete one SEMS 4 form for each thana, 
district staff should complete one for the district, and regional staff should complete one for 
each region. SEMS Form 4 should be complet ed using information from SEMS 2 and SEMS 
3. Detailed guidelines for completing SEMS Form 4 are shown in Annex XI , Table 4 (a) .
SEMS Form 4 is shown in Annex XI , Table 4 (b) . SEMS Form 4 can also be generated by 
computer. 
Once SEMS Form 4 is completed, it is possible to assess the overall performance of thanas, 
districts and regions, and to make comparisons between areas. For example, when 
comparing thanas, districts or regions, staff could look for an abnormally high cost per farmer 
intending to test new ideas. This would indicate a requirement for additional support, 
training or supervision. Actions that can be taken to improve area performance are outlined 
in the earlier section on making decisions using indicators. 
Where computer services are available the Deputy Director will designate one officer as in 
charge SEMS. The following procedure will be used in operating computerised SEMS: 
! the Block Supervisor brings completed SEMS 1 Forms to the thana office each week 
during the season, and these are checked by thana staff; 
! the Thana Agricultural Officers submits copies of these SEMS 1 Forms each month to 
the district office; 
! the in-charge SEMS ensures that the Di strict Computer Operator enters the SEMS 
Form 1 data onto the computer. Data entry can be planned, as the district and thana 
extension plans will show what events are planned for when, and it is therefore possible 
to see when SEMS 1 Forms should be completed and submitted for data entry; 
! in-charge SEMS ensures that a performance report for each thana is printed, and sent 
to the Thana Agricultural Officer, in order to provide information for making thana level 
planning decisions; 
! the Deputy Director will ensure that a district performance report is printed using the 
SEMS Computer System, and that a copy of the report and a copy of the computer disk 
are submitted to the Additional Director, Region; 
! the Statistical Officer, Region, will ensure that reports from each district are compiled on 
the SEMS Computer System, and that a summary report is prepared and sent to 
headquarters. 
The functions of the in-charge SEMS are to ensure that: 
! thanas deliver SEMS Form 1 in time, and that plans and schedules for data entry are 
prepared; 
! the computer operator enters SEMS 1 data effi ciently and quickly, as soon as they are 
received; 
! computer defects are identified and reported; 
! data summaries are prepared and distributed in time for analysis and extension planning. 
Computerised Seasonal Extension 
Monitoring S ystem

12.3 KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDE A ND PRACTICE S URVEYS
Extension work is only useful if it leads to changes in farm practices. The Knowledge, 
Attitude and Practice (KAP) Survey is a monitoring and evaluation technique which shows 
the actual reaction of farmers to exposure to new ideas. KAP results show what changes in 
farm practices have occurred. While the S easonal Extension Monitoring System shows 
what happens at extension events, KAP shows what happens after the event. 
KAP is used by District and Thana officers to im prove the effectiveness of extension work. 
Most agricultural technology is related to a specific season. 
To find out if new ideas are actually bei ng adopted, KAP surveys are implemented when the 
correct season comes round again, to show if farmers: 
! Have retained KNOWLEDG E of the technology (K)
! Have a positive ATTITUDE towards the technology (A)
! Actually PRACTICE the technology. (P)
The levels of Knowledge, Attitude and Practice are found by interviewing a sample of 
farmers who are known to have had exposure to the technology, i.e. those farmers who 
attended specific extension events. The names and addresses of farmers who had contact 
with DAE's previous extension activities can be found in demonstration, training registers or 
BS diaries. These records should be properly maintained. 
If farmers are not using new agricultural practices, that is there are negative answers relating 
to PRACTICE, this indicates a problem, and a requirement for action to be taken. 
The reasons for non-adoption of new ideas can fall into three groups: 
! farmers were not aware of the new idea - they do not have the KNOWLEDGE ;
! farmers are aware of the new ideas, but have rejected them - they have a negative 
ATTITUDE;
! farmers are aware and favourable in attitude, but some other factor (such as non- 
availability of inputs) prevents them from changing practices - they do not PRACTICE.
The necessary corrective action is different depending on whether there is a knowledge 
problem, an attitude problem, or some external barrier to adoption. Some examples for 
overcoming them include: 
Knowledge Problem: improving extension methods and / or changing choice of methods in 
the next extension programme. 
Attitude Problem: re-examining technical and economic suitability of the technology. 
Practice Problem: identifying ways to break constraints, if not possible, then suspending 
action on this technology. 
In all these cases it is important to find the reasons why the farming practice has not 
changed. Corrective action will depend on the type of farmer. For example, smaller farmers
are likely to require different corrective action to larger farmers. Smaller farmers may require 
Using KAP Results to Improve Performance

risk or cost reduction in technologies which are being promoted before they decide to 
change practices whereas this might not be as important for larger farmers. 
KAP can be carried out at any level of the Department of Agricultural Extension. In practice, 
KAP will normally be done at district or thana level, because most planning decisions are 
taken at this level, and KAP results are intended to provide district and thana officers with 
information to help make planning decisions. 
At thana level, the AEO, under the management of the Thana Agricultural Officer, is 
responsible for conducting KAP Surveys each season. At district level, the District 
Specialist, under the responsibility of the Deputy Director, District, is responsible for 
conducting KAP Surveys each season. At national level, KAP Surveys should be organised, 
implemented and reported by a team from the Planning and Evaluation Wing. 
There are six steps to conducting a KAP Survey: 
! selecting the technology and compiling key points of the technology; 
! collecting participation records and establishing a sample; 
! designing and pre-testing the survey form; 
! conducting interviews; 
! summarising and analysing results; 
! reporting findings. 
The following sections describe each of these steps. 
Selecting Technology and Compiling Key Points of the Technology 
The first step is selection of the technology to be evaluated. Priority should be given to 
technologies: 
! which have been given major emphasis in the extension programme, in terms of funding 
and staff time; 
! which are aimed at the more numerous target groups; 
! which have not been evaluated already or recently; 
! for which new extension methods have been used. 
Because KAP is a follow-up technique, it is usua lly used to evaluate a technology which was 
in the extension programme for the corresponding season one year ago. For example, the 
start of the Kharif-II season in the current year would be the right time to evaluate the 
adoption of a transplanted Aman variety demonstrated in the Kharif-II season the previous 
year.
The object of the knowledge part of KAP is to find out whether extension efforts were 
effective in giving information about a new tec hnology to farmers. If farmers did not acquire 
the required knowledge, changes in farm practices are not possible. Knowledge of a 
technology can be broken down into key features, which are the specific components which 
must be understood in order to understand and use the technology. For example, the name 
of a variety and how and when it should be cultivated, or the application rate and timing for a 
specific fertiliser. So, to assess farmer knowledge, about a selected technology, these key 
features / components should be identified and listed. Care should be taken to include only 
those features / components which were covered during the specific extension event. 
Responsibilities 
Implementing a KAP Survey

Collecting Participation Records and Establishing a Sample 
A KAP survey is simply a case of finding some of the farmers who participated in an 
extension event about the selected technol ogy, and, when they have had an opportunity to 
use the technology, finding and interviewing them . Not every farmer who attended extension 
events needs to be contacted. A sample is sufficient. The number of farmers that should 
be contacted and interviewed depends partly on how many farmers were contacted in total, 
and Table 12.1 shows the required sample size for a number of circumstances. 
TABLE 12.1: SAMPLE SIZE FO R KAP S URVEY S
Total number of farmers listed in
DAE participation records 
Approximate sample size for 
KAP Survey 
500 or more 31 
250 28 
100 24 
50 20 
31 or less 15 
This should be a random selection, where every farmer on the list has an equal chance of 
being selected for interview. In this way, sampling is not biased, selected farmers are 
located in different places rather than only one village, and the results of the KAP survey are 
statistically valid. To make the selection of farmers according to random sampling, the 
following procedure should be used. The procedure is explained using an example. 
EXAMPLE: ESTABLISHING A SAMPLE 
Note: T his e xample, as sume s that there we re a total of 251 farmers participating, and that the
required sample size is 30 farmers. 
1. Make a serial list of farmers who participated , using the available records (training attendance
register, or Block Supervisor diary, or demonst ration register etc.). T his is know n as t he sample 
frame . Do not include DAE staff that attended. 
2. Calc ulate t he st epping interval, which will show whic h f armers should be selected. T he stepping
interval is equal t o t he t otal numbe r of f armer s (251) divided by the sample size (30), or 8.37,
rounded down to 8 . This means that e very 8th f armer on t he serial list should be picked. 
3. To decide wher e t o begin on t he list s elect t he f irst f armer using a random number between 1 and
the stepping interval ( 8). Use r andom number t ables , or the random number function on a calculator, 
or simply write the numbers on pieces of paper and ask someone to draw one. The names with the 
serial number that matches the random number is selected as the first farmer . For e xample , the
random number might be 5 , so the fifth farmer on the sample frame serial list i s selected.
4. T he remaining sample farmers w ill be every 8th name on the list afte r the first farmer or the first
farmer plus 1 stepping interval, plus 2 stepping intervals, and so on up t o t he sample size. I n t he
example, t his is t he (5 plus 8) 1 3th farmer, (5 plus 16) 21 st farmer, (5 plus 24) 29 th f armer, and s o
on. 
This i s the primary sample of f armers. T here s hou ld be o ne reserve for each selected farmer. 
During interviews, some o f the p rimar y sample may turn ou t not to be member s o f the target g roup for
the selected technology. Even those who are members o f the targe t g roup may be una vailable for
interview in some cases. In these cases interv iew the reserve farmer instead. The ea siest way to
select a reserve farmer is to take the person wh o is adjac ent in t he list of people who attended t he
same even t as the farmer who was originally sele cted .
Designing and Pre-testing the Survey Form

There is no standard layout for a KAP questionnaire, because the details will depend on the 
number and type of key features / components. The questionnaire should be as simple as 
possible to make interviewing easier. Table 12.2 shows an example questionnaire that has 
been designed for the KAP of a paddy variety technology. 
TAB LE 12.2: EXAM PLE KAP QUESTIONNA IRE
PART A. IDENTIFICA TION D ETA ILS
Crop/Variety T. AUS BR-26 Technology VARIETY 
Sea son extended KHARIF-1 '94 Sea son e valuated KHARIF-1 '95 
Extension methods _________________________________________________ 
Farmer Name __________________ Son/wife of ________________ 
OPERATED farm size _____ decimals Sex M/F ________________ 
(include land worked by farmer on tenancy) 
Village __________________ Block _________________ 
Thana __________________ District _________________ 
AEZ __________________ 
PA RT B. CON FIRMATION OF EXTENSION CONTACT 
Farmer confirms he/she participated in event? YES / NO (ring as appropriate) 
PART C. KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDE AND PRACTICE
a) K , A & P relative t o Key Points of Technology 
Item of 
Information
Key Points for 
Recommended 
Technology 
Farmer's 
KNOWLEDGE 
of Key Points
Farmer's 
PRACTICE
(this year) 
Farmer's 
ATTITUDE 
of Key Points
Variety name BR-26 
Quality Se mi-fine
Season Aus
Duration 95 da ys
Yield 3.5 mt/ha 
Pest/disease 
resistance 
blight
b) De tails of discussion on farmer's A TTITUD E (Continue on Reverse)
There are three parts to a KAP questionnaire: 
Part A contains the identification details such as the technology, the season, the name and 
location of the farmer, the gender of the farmer and the farm size group of the farmer. This 
information helps to check if DAE targeting criteria are working well. 
Part B contains the contact details, and verifies that the farmer actually attended the 
extension event. 
Part C contains the actual KAP assessment, and assesses knowledge of the key points of 
the recommended technology, the farmers attitude towards the specific key points, and the

farmers actual practice. Part C contains space for recording in more detail the discussion 
regarding the farmer's attitude. This is often the most important, especially when the farmer 
has a negative attitude towards the technology. It is essential to find out why the technology 
is not acceptable, so that corrective action can be taken. 
It is important to note that although the term KAP survey is used, questions are actually 
asked in the following order: 
KNOWLEDGE 
"
PRACTICE 
"
ATTITUDE
This is because the farmers attitude is most important when they know the key points but do 
not practice them. Therefore, practice is checked before attitude. The example 
questionnaire in Table 12.2 has been designed to help this. 
When the questionnaire has been drafted, a pre-test should be conducted. This is done by 
taking a few copies of the draft questionnaire and interviewing a small number of farmers to 
check that the questions are clearly understood and that farmers are able to provide 
answers which can be used for evaluation. Revisions to the format are often required after 
the pre-test. 
The people interviewed for pre-test must be target group members (otherwise they cannot 
provide proper answers), but they must not be in the sample to be used for the main survey - 
or they will be interviewed twice. To avoid this, the pre-test should be done after the sample 
has been selected. 
Conducting Interviews 
Interview techniques with the farmers are important. The four principles for effective 
interviews are described below. 
Interviewers must remain neutral: KAP interviewers must be on their guard against 
prompting farmers for the reply to their questions, or in any way indicating that one type of 
reply is more preferred than another. Once again, all staff must be aware that information 
about problems is the most valuable. Above all, the interviewer must never suggest, or 
indicate by his/her manner, that farmers are wrong. 
Interviewers must be consistent: the items included in the questionnaire must be 
consistently covered in all interviews, in the same way. The questionnaire may be added to 
in individual cases but should never be reduced. 
Interviewers can use checklists: the most difficult part of maintaining consistency is in 
conducting open discussions to throw light on farmers' attitudes to technology (Part C of the 
KAP questionnaire). One way to maintain consistenc y is to make a checklist of points which 
should be covered. For example: 
! which specific qualities of the technology does the farmer like/dislike? (the key points 
could be used as a starting point for discussion); 
! does the new technology lack technical s uperiority compared to existing practice? 
! do the benefits of the new technology justify the time and effort required? 
! is the new technology too risky? If so, will the farmer possibly adopt in future when 
he/she has seen the technology operating longer?

! would adoption of the technology involve giving up some other activity which is more 
profitable or more vital for the household? 
A checklist is not a questionnaire and should not be used like one. It is simply an aid to the 
interviewer's memory. If farmers do not give a reason for attitudes, or if the reason given 
does not seem convincing, the interviewer c an raise the various possibilities from the 
checklist. However, the interviewer should not pr ompt the farmer if they have already stated 
a clear reason for holding a positive or negative attitude. 
Avoiding biases: the objective of a KAP is to find out the target group's true response to 
extension efforts. It is essential to avoid producing results which are biased in any direction. 
Biases can result from many factors and c an be avoided by good interviewing technique. All 
interviews should follow guidelines for participatory discussions. Interviewers should 
approach farmers as equals, at a time and place convenient to farmers, and should always 
try to let farmers express themselves as freely and openly as possible. Some tips for 
avoiding biases follow. 
KAP SURVEY - AVOIDING B IASES
DO 
! keep to the randomly drawn sample; 
! be consistent between interviews; 
! approach farmers as equals, in a relaxed and friendly manner; 
! conduct the interview at a time and place convenient to farmers; 
! observe all normal rules for participatory discussion. 
DON'T
! give advance information of the selected farmers to Block Supervisors or other junior 
staff; 
! let Block Supervisors go looking for selected farmers ahead of the interviewing staff 
member;
! adopt dominating attitudes towards farmers (or let other staff adopt such attitudes); 
! prompt the farmer;
! in any way indicate that one reply is preferred. 
Summarising and Analysing Results 
KAP is a tool for guiding action by extension managers. A KAP should be analysed and 
reported immediately - within one week from the end of data collection. 
Steps for analysing KAP are described as follows: 
! total farmers who gave replies; 
! expressing sub-totals as percentages; 
! analysing KAP surveys.

Total the actual number of farmers who gave various replies: for example, the number 
of farmers who did/did not know the variety nam e, or the number of farmers who are/are not 
practising the technology this season. This is not possible for the results of discussions in 
Part C (b) of the KAP Survey, as it is qualitative rather than quantitative. These have to be 
sorted out into groups before analysis, based on the checklist of possible factors affecting 
attitudes. Items on the checklist can be used as group headings for the summary of 
attitudes, but the officer analysing the KAP must be alert for items which were not on the 
checklist. 
Express sub-totals as percentages of the sample : care is required because percentages 
giving reasons for non-adoption should be calculated on the basis of total non-adopting 
farmers, not total farmers. For example, suppose there are 20 non-adopters out of 30 
farmers, and that 6 of the non-adopters stated that the technology was too risky. The 
percentage stating 'Too risky' should be calculated as (6 ÷ 20 x 100 = 30%). Quoting results 
to the nearest whole percentage point is sufficient. 
Analyse KAP: in analysing a KAP it is not sufficient merely to state the percentage of 
farmers giving various answers to the interview. KAP is intended to form the basis for action. 
This means that the analysis must clearly identify the causes of problems and successes, 
and draw conclusions for the required action. In making the analysis it can be helpful to 
follow a tree structure, shown in Figure 12.1 .
FIGURE 12.1: KAP DECISION TR EE
Problem: 
TECHNOLOGY NOT 
ADOPTED 
KNOWLEDGE OF 
Key Points 
Yes No 
ATTITUDE 
negative? 
No Yes 
Non-extension 
problem 
exists. 
Able to solve? 
Non-extension 
problem 
exists. 
Able to solve? 
Technology 
does not meet needs. 
Able to modify? 
Technology 
does not meet needs. 
Able to modify? 
Yes No 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology Take required
action 
Take required
action 
Yes No 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology Take required
action 
Take required
action 
Outreach 
Technique 
Proble m
Outreach 
Technique 
Proble m
Yes No 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology 
Suspend outreach 
for this technology Take required
action 
Take required
action

Reporting Findings 
The analysis and reporting of the data should wherever possible be done by the officer who 
did the interviewing, as they will often have made many supporting observations and notes 
which are additional to the basic questionnaire content. Reports should be short and simple 
(no more than ten pages). A one-page summary should always be given, stating very briefly 
the conclusions of the KAP. The full content of a KAP report should include: 
! summary; 
! introduction; 
! results section; 
! an analysis; and 
! conclusions and action required. 
Summary 
A one-page statement of key features of introduction, analysis and conclusions sections. 
Any results quoted must be highly selective and for illustration only. The summary should not 
contain any material not already given in main text. 
Introduction 
The District and/or Thana(s) covered by the KAP, the technology being evaluated, the 
season and year in which the subject 
technology was originally extended, the dates between which the KAP was conducted. 
Results 
Tables, with BRIEF supporting text, showing the numerical results: 
! percentage of farmers from intended target group; 
! percentage of farmers who have tried to use the technology; 
! percentage of farmers who know each of the key points; 
! summary of attitudes for farmers having knowledge but practising differently. 
Analysis 
An assessment of whether the level of adopti on is satisfactory, taking into account past 
performance, performance of other technologies and areas, potential benefits to farmers. If 
performance is not satisfactory, whether the problem is due to KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDE or 
OTHER factors, or a combination, and what corrective action is desirable or possible. 
Conclusions and Action Required 
A clear statement on whether the technology should be continued with more resources, be 
retained at the same level, be modified in technical content, be modified in method of 
outreach, or be deleted from the programme 
The KAP report should give clear recommendations on action to improve extension 
performance for the evaluated technology. The main time for acting on KAP findings is 
when annual thana plans are being prepared. Staff should consider all the available 
information regarding what technology the target groups require, and how successful DAE 
has been in supplying it. This includes information from FINA for targeting new technologies 
Applying KAP Results to Planning Decisions

and outreach methods, and information from SEMS and KAP about the performance 
achieved with past activities. 
Effective action will be more likely if all the concerned DAE personnel have a chance to 
discuss the KAP findings as soon as possible after the report is drafted, in advance of 
annual planning. This enables any differences of opinion regarding the findings to be 
resolved, and permits all the concerned personnel to combine their ideas about how to 
overcome problems. Figure 12.1 can be used as a basis for discussing the type of problems 
identified, and the best way of overcoming these problems in the future. 
A half-day idea sharing session for this pur pose should be planned to follow every KAP.
These types of session also provides an oppor tunity for personnel to exchange experiences 
about actually conducting the KAP, so that improvements can be introduced next time. 
12.4 TH E RO LE OF PLANN ING AND EVALUATION WIN G IN MONITOR ING AND 
EVALUATION 
The Planning and Evaluation Wing Management Inform ation System (MIS) Section is the 
central clearing house for monitoring and evaluation information in the Department. The MIS 
Section database includes the: 
Extension Planning System: which contains records of annual extension programmes for 
every thana in Bangladesh, including types of activity, technologies, budgets and sources of 
funds. 
SEMS:which contains records of the farmer contact, understanding and testing as recorded 
on SEMS Form 1 for every extension event c onducted by the Department and are also kept 
at District level on computers. This data can be used by managers at any level to query 
extension performance by farmer category, agro- ecological zone, district or thana, by event 
type, or by technology. 
Strong links are maintained with Field Services Wing in relation to the collection and use of 
MIS data.
Regional staff of Planning and Evaluation Wing include the Statistical Officer and Assistant 
Chief. They provide specialist assistance and support to computer operators dealing with 
SEMS and the EPS. 
The MIS Section at Headquarters comprises one Joint Director, a Deputy Chief, a Systems 
Analyst and a Programmer. The section maintains a Central Computer Support Unit, which 
will have overall responsibility for computer operation, procedures, and programme 
development within DAE.