National Agriculture Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
April 1999

Contents 
 
1. Introduction.....................................................................................................................................1 
2. Objectives of the National Agriculture Policy .................................................................................2 
3. Crop Production Policy...................................................................................................................3 
4. Seeds .............................................................................................................................................5 
5. Fertilisers........................................................................................................................................6 
6. Minor Irrigation................................................................................................................................7 
7. Pest Management ..........................................................................................................................9 
8. Agricultural Mechanisation ...........................................................................................................10 
9. Agriculture Research....................................................................................................................11 
10. Agriculture Extension....................................................................................................................12 
11. Agriculture Marketing ....................................................................................................................13 
12. Land Use.......................................................................................................................................14 
13. Agricultural Education and Training..............................................................................................15 
15. Government Support for Agricultural Production and Contingency Plan ....................................18 
16. Food-based Nutrition.....................................................................................................................18 
17. Environmental Protection in Agriculture........................................................................................19 
18. Women in Agriculture....................................................................................................................19 
19. Coordination among the Government, NGOs and Private Sector...............................................20 
20. Reliable Database.........................................................................................................................20 
21. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................21

1. Introduction 
1.1 The economy of Bangladesh is prim arily dependent on agriculture. About 84 percent 
of the total population live in rural areas and ar e directly or indirectly engaged in a wide 
range of agricultural activities. Agriculture contributes about 32 percent to the country's GDP, 
about 23 percent of which is contributed by th e crop sector alone. About 63 percent of the 
labour forces are em ployed in agriculture with about 57 percent being em ployed in the crop 
sector. 
1.2 The scope of modem agriculture has been widened significantly Although agriculture 
used to be originally defined as the cultiva tion of land for producing crops only, now-a-days, 
any applied activity through proper utilization of natural resources which relates to the 
production, development, preservation, processing, marketing and extension of not only crops 
but also other agricultural com modities such as fish, m eat, eggs, forest products, etc. is 
universally accepted within the purview of ag riculture. According to the above definition, 
crop production, anim al husbandry, fisheries, fo restry, etc. are integral com ponents of 
agriculture. But, crops undoubtedly constitute th e largest and m ost im portant sector of 
Bangladesh agriculture. 
1.3 Although overall agriculture encom passes the developm ent of crops, livestock, 
fishery, environm ent and forestry, separate policies on f isheries, livestock, as well as 
environment and forestry have already been fo rmulated by the respective m inistries. In this 
perspective, Ministry of Agriculture has form ulated this policy docum ent in order to provide 
proper guidelines f or various developm ent activ ities relating to crops, which is the largest 
sector of agriculture. As expected, policies re lated to crop production and m arketing together 
with m inor irrigation, seeds, fertilizers and agricultural credit got prom inence in the 
document. Since crop sector plays the m ajor role in Bangladesh agriculture and gets the top 
most im portance in various agriculture related program mes of the governm ent, this policy 
document for the developm ent of crop sector is , therefore, titled as the National Agriculture 
Policy. 
1.4 In Bangladesh, it is possible to reduce ru ral poverty and raise the living standard of 
common people by establishing agriculture as a prof itable sector. It is, therefore, necessary to 
reorganize and develop the agricultural production system into a m ore dynam ic and 
commercially profitable sector. In this context, the prim ary goal of the National Agriculture 
Policy is to m odernize and diversify the crop sector, in other words the entire agricultural 
system, through initiation and im plementation of a well-organized and well- coordinated 
development plan. 
1.5 The following opportunities and Constraints prevailing in the agriculture sector have 
been taken into consideration with a view to fram ing and im plementing an effective 
agriculture policy: 
Opportunities 
• Agriculture sector is the single largest contributor to GDP. 
• Crop production system is highly labour in tensive and there is an abundance of 
labour supply in the country. 
Agriculture Policy 1

• Agriculture is the largest source of employment for skilled and unskilled labour. 
• Favourable natural environm ent generally exists throughout the year for crop 
production. 
• Wide range of bio-diversity exists for different crops. 
• Different crops and agricultural com modities are the m ain sources of nutrition, 
including protein, minerals and vitamins. 
• Agricultural com modities have com paratively higher value added than non-
agricultural commodities. 
Constraints 
• Agriculture is dependent on the vagaries of nature and is risky. 
• Availability of cultivable land is decreasing. 
• Lack of proper land use planning. 
• Widespread poverty among the population engaged in agriculture. 
• Lack of required capital for agricultural activities. 
• Agricultural commodities are rapidly perishable and post harvest losses are too high. 
• Inadequacy of appropriate technology c onsidering farm ers' socio- econom ic 
conditions. 
• Decreasing yields of different crops due to slow expansion of m odern technology as 
well as unplanned use of soil and water. 
• Uncertainty of fair price of agricu ltural com modities due to underdeveloped 
marketing system. 
• Very weak backward-forward linkage in agriculture. 
• Limited knowledge of com mon people about the nutritional value of agricultural 
commodities including vegetables and fruits. 
• Absence of efficient as well as effective farmers' organization at the grass root level. 
• Inadequate use of improved seeds, fertilizers, irrigation and other inputs. 
 
2. Objectives of the National Agriculture Policy 
2.1 The overall objective of the National Agricu lture Policy is to m ake the nation self-
sufficient in food through increasing production of all crops including cereals and ensure a 
dependable food security system for all. The specific objectives of the National Agriculture 
Policy are to: 
• ensure a profitable and sustainable agricultural production system and raise the 
purchasing power by increasing real income of the farmers; 
• preserve and develop land productivity; 
• reduce excessive dependence on any single crop to minimize the risk; 
• increase production and supplies of m ore nutritious food crops and thereby ensuring 
food security and improving nutritional status; 
• preserve existing bio-diversity of different crops; 
• take up program mes for the introducti on, utilization and extension of bio-
technology; 
• take necessary steps to ensure environm ental protection as well as ' environment-
friendly sustainable agriculture' through increased use of organic m anure and 
strengthening of the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) programme; 
Agriculture Policy 2

• take appropriate steps to develop an e fficient irrigation system and encourage 
farmers in providing supplem entary irrigation during drought with a view to 
increasing cropping intensity and yield; 
• establish agriculture as a diversified and sustainable incom e generating sector 
through strengthening of ' Farming System' based agricultural production and agro-
forestry programmes; 
• take effective steps to ensure input supplies to the farm ers at fair prices in a 
competitive market and rem ove difficulties at the f armers' level which have arisen 
out of the privatization of input distribution system; 
• develop marketing system to ensure fair prices of agricultural commodities; 
• introduce an appropriate institutional syst em of providing credit to ensure the 
availability of agricultural credit in time; 
• produce and supply of agricultural commodities as required by the industrial sector; 
• reduce im ports of agricultural com modities and find out newer opportunities for 
increasing exports as well; 
• create opportunities for establishing agro-processing and agro-based industries; 
• protect interests of the small, marginal and tenant farmers; 
• update the agricultural system in the li ght of the Agreem ent on Agriculture under 
WTO, SAFTA and other international trea ties by protecting the national interests; 
and 
• develop contingency management system to combat natural disasters. 
 
3. Crop Production Policy 
3.1 Although the intensification of food gr ain production, especially rice- based 
production system is apparently profitable from the farmers' point of view, this approach has 
appeared to be harm ful in protecting the land productivity. At present, rice covers about 75 
percent of the cultivated land in Bangladesh. Area coverage by other crops are as f ollows: 
pulses (4.64%), wheat (3.92%), oilseeds (3.77%), jute (3.71%), sugarcane (1.23%), potato 
(1.11%), fruits (0.84%) and vegetables (1.39%) The production system dominated by a single 
crop (i.e. rice) is neither scientific nor accepta ble from the econom ic point of view. It is, 
therefore, necessary to increase the cultiva tion and production of other crops. However, 
considering the increasing dem and for foodgrains and with a view to ensuring food security, 
production of rice will continue to get prior ity in the foodgrain production program mes. In 
order to increase rice production, supportive progr ammes will be taken to raise per hectare 
yield through the use of m odem technology and improved cultural practices along with the 
increased use of HYV seeds. 
3.2 In Bangladesh, only 4.14 percent of net cultivable land rem ain as current fallow, 
which m eans that there is hardly any scope .for increasing cultivable land. Currently, 
cropping intensity is around 185 percent. Thus , the only possible option for increasing 
agricultural production is to increase both the cropping intensity and yields sim ultaneously. 
In this respect, policies adopted by the government are to: 
• take supportive programmes for inter-cropping in a field instead of single cropping; 
and 
Agriculture Policy 3

• take appropriate m easures in reducing the gap between potential yield and farm ers' 
realized yield of different crops to raise the present level of production significantly. 
3.3 Crop diversification is one of the m ajor components of crop production policy. For 
the overall development of crop sector, special emphasis will be given to crop diversif ication 
programme under the crop production policy. The gove rnment policies in this respect are as 
follows: 
• Area under wheat has m eanwhile reached at 0.8 m illion hectare. Given the potential 
for expanding wheat acreage, ef forts will c ontinue to encourage f armers to grow 
more wheat. 
• The production of m aize has shown prospectiv e results in last two years. Maize has 
also gained popularity as hum an food side by side with the poultry feed. Public 
sector procurem ent of m aize has been in troduced like rice and wheat in order to 
encourage farm ers in m aize cultivation. The efforts for increasing area and 
production of maize will be strengthened. 
• The program me for increasing area and production of other crops, e.g., potato, 
pulses, oil seeds, vegetables, fruits and spices will gradually be extended under the 
crop diversification programme. 
• Production of different cash crops including jute, cotton will be increased and efforts 
will be made to expand their multiple uses. 
• Special development programmes will be taken with a view to increasing production 
of potential crops suitable for the coastal areas and the hill tracts. 
3.4 As a m atter of fact, increased crop production depends on good quality seeds, 
efficient irrigation m anagement, use of balanced fertilizers and availability of credit in tim e. 
In accordance with the free m arket econom y, th e im portant task of agricultural input 
distribution has largely been shifted to the priv ate sector. Despite its beneficial effects in 
general, the privatization process has given rise to considerable inefficiency in som e cases, 
such as, marketing and distribution of minor irrigation equipments and fertilizers. It is alleged 
that the privatization process has also been accom panied by non- availability, price rise, 
smuggling and quality degradation of fertilizers. Under this situation the governm ent will 
seek to: 
• establish and consolidate the distribution system for irrigation equipm ents, 
fertilizers, seeds and credit in the light of farmers' need; and 
• ensure responsibility and accountability of the private sector through strengthening 
of the relevant legal framework and its enforcement. 
3.5 The production of crops, especially aman crop is heavily dam aged every year due to 
the inadequate soil m oisture regim e prevailing in drought affected areas. To com bat this 
situation government has adopted the following policies: 
• Supplementary irrigation will be ensured in severe and extrem ely severe drought 
affected areas. 
• Location specif ic (including hill tracts) suitable crops will be identif ied with 
respect to technological and econom ic parameters and appropriate strategies will 
be pursued for cultivating those crops. 
• Measures will be taken to minimize post-harvest losses by introducing appropriate 
technologies. 
Agriculture Policy 4

3.6 Since agricultural production is very expe nsive and risky, often it is not possible for 
the farmers to grow crops profitably at the i ndividual level due to the shortage of required 
labour and capital. Therefore, governm ent will encourage the form ation of self-m otivated 
cooperatives for producing and m arketing agricultural com modities which should ideally 
succeed in mobilizing adequate resources (including labour and capital) for m ore production, 
income and equity. 
 
4. Seeds 
4.1 At present, only a sm all portion of the required quality seeds for different crops is 
supplied by the Bangladesh Agricultural Devel opment Corporation (BADC). Rest of the 
seeds are produced, preserved and used under priv ate management, especially at the farmers' 
level. Governm ent has already declared th e National Seed policy with the objective of 
promoting seed industry in the private sector . In pursuance of the seed policy, governm ent 
has revised the Seed Act of 1977 and also form ulated seed rules in the light of the Seed Act 
(Amendment) 1997. In this respect the government will follow the policies mentioned below: 
• In the light of the prevailing seed act and seed rules, the governm ent will retain the 
opportunities already provided to the pr ivate sector for production, im port and 
marketing of seeds side by side with the public sector. 
• Appropriate mechanism will be devised to improve the technical skill of the private 
sector with regards to seed treatm ent, s eed preservation at specific m oisture level 
and seed storage management so as to ensure the highest quality of seeds. 
• The act of favourable policy preparation, technical supports, training, etc. will be 
strengthened in order to encourage private sector participation in seed developm ent 
and seed preservation. 
• Improved technology-based seed production, seed m ultiplication and related farm 
activities have been declared as industrial enterprises in the present industrial policy. 
For the developm ent of seed industry this policy will be continued and adequate 
government support will be provided. 
• In addition to the production and m arketing of seeds in the public and private 
sectors, the policies relating to seed produc tion and seed preservation at the farmers' 
level will continue so that the farm ers can easily use good quality seeds. The 
government has, m eanwhile, taken initia tive for strengthening the activities of 
BADC in this regard. Necessary steps will be taken during the Fif th Five Year Plan 
period to raise BADC's seed distribution pr ogramme to the extent of ten percent of 
the total demand. 
• Already introduced seed buf fer stock syst em will continue to ensure the norm al 
supply of seeds of major crops at the time of natural calamities or any other disaster. 
• The conditional opportunity that has alrea dy been given to the private sector to 
import hybrid rice seeds for increasing rice production will be further consolidated 
on the basis of performance analysis. But, special care will be taken to ensure that 
the private sector produces hybrid seeds locally and that the hybrid seeds offer 
higher yield and more financial benefits to the farmers on a sustained basis. 
Agriculture Policy 5

• At present, Seed Certification Agency (SCA) is the only legal authority to certif y 
seeds. W ith a view to increasing supply of quality seeds, private sector agencies 
participating in the seed production progr ammes will be allowed to m arket their 
'truthfully labeled seeds' side by side with the governm ent agencies. The Seed 
Certification Agency will have the lega l authority and responsibility to closely 
monitor the entire seed labeling and certif ying process of the respective private 
sector organisations. The Seed Certif ication Agency will take m embership of the 
International Seed Testing Association (ISTA) so that the opportunities for exporting 
internationally standard seeds are created. 
 
5. Fertilisers 
5.1 Chemical Fertiliser is one of the m ain inputs required for increasing crop production. 
The expansion of modern agricultural practices together with intensified cultivation has led to 
an increasing dem and for fertilisers. It is ther efore, necessary to ensure tim ely supply of 
fertilisers to m atch the dem and. As a result of unbalanced use of fertilisers, the fertility of 
land is declining on the one hand and the potential yield is not achieved on the other. In this 
respect, it is extremely important to adopt and implement such policies so as to encourage the 
farmers in using balanced f ertilisers and at the same time protecting the soil f ertility. As a 
broad principle of fertiliser use, a sustained increase in the productive capacity of land and its 
preservation in the long run will get priority over the immediate yield improvement. In order 
to strengthen fertiliser m anagement, followi ng policies already adopted by the governm ent 
will be continued: 
• Steps already taken to popularize the use of granular urea as a m eans of reducing 
excessive use of urea fertilisers will be strengthened. 
• The rules on 5-grades already introduced by the governm ent in order to ensure the 
use of blended fertilisers will remain in force. 
• Enforcement of concerned rules and regula tions will be strengthened in order to 
ensure good quality of fertilisers at the farmers' level. 
• Appropriate program mes for training, fiel d dem onstration, publicity, etc. will be 
extended further so as to encourage farmers in using balanced fertilisers. 
• The use of organic m anure, bio-f ertilisers and com post will be encouraged. 
Measures will be taken to update agricu ltural extension, training and m otivational 
work at the farm ers' level so that th e farmers can follow suitable cropping patterns 
to maintain the natural balance of soil nutrients. 
• Production, im portation, sales and distributi on of any fertiliser harm ful to soil 
environment will be banned. 
• Distribution system of fertilisers in the pr ivate sector will continue. But, the public 
sector will import fertiliser, if necessary, to ensure its supply and availability in time. 
• The district and Thana Com mittees already formed by the government will continue 
to monitor fertiliser distribution at the farmers' level. 
• The present practice of fertiliser buffer stock system will continue. 
Agriculture Policy 6

• Realistic steps will be taken to ensure th e use of phosphatic and potassium fertilisers 
as well as various m icronutrients. The use of DAP (Di-am onium Phosphate) 
fertiliser, already introduced by the government, will be encouraged in this regard. 
• The Soil Resources Developm ent Institute (SRDI) will be strengthened and soil-
testing program mes will be started in five-year phases based on soil and Agro-
ecological Zones (AEZ). Besides, the use of existing 'Soil Health Card' will be 
further extended for improving soil quality. 
 
6. Minor Irrigation 
6.1 Irrigation is the leading input for incr easing yield and production of foodgrains and 
other crops. About 90 percent of the total irri gated area of the country are covered by m inor 
irrigation. A well-planned irrigation m anagement program me is, therefore, essential for 
gradual increase of cropping intensity as well as yield. It is in this background that the 
National Agriculture Policy has given special em phasis on the developm ent of m inor 
irrigation. 
6.2 As a result of liberal im portation of irrigation equipm ents, shifting of irrigation 
management to the private sector and withdrawal of siting restrictions and standardisation of 
irrigation equipm ents, total area irrigated and num ber of irrigation equipm ents have 
significantly increased, which has appeared to be the driving force for increasing production 
of food crops, especially rice and wheat. The major source of irrigation expansion has, 
however, been the groundwater technologies, pr edominantly Shallow Tubewells; irrigation 
by Deep Tubewells has virtually not increased in the recent years. Although there is m uch 
prospect for the surface water irrigation but it ha s not been expanded to 'any significant scale. 
Instead, the withdrawal of siting restriction a nd standardisation of irrigation equipm ents has 
resulted in some negative impact on the efficiency of irrigation management. For example, in 
some places much larger number of equipments have been installed than technically required 
and m any of those installations turned out to be physically and technically inappropriate. 
Such phenomena have resulted in capacity underu tilisation of pum ps and increased the cost 
of irrigation which in turn increases the produc tion costs. In this respect, appropriate steps 
will be taken f or the developm ent and extension of minor irrigation system in the light of 
National Water Policy and Water Resources Development Plan. 
6.3 Although minor irrigation is largely in the domain of the private sector, the onus of 
improving irrigation efficiency still lies with the government. In this context, primary goal of 
the m inor irrigation m anagement under the purview of Agriculture Policy is to accelerate 
crop intensification and increase yields through planned utilisation of surface and 
groundwater in an environm ent friendly atm osphere. To achieve this goal, activities of 
various agencies involved in surface and groundwater irrigation program mes will be 
coordinated at the national level. Specif ically, the following steps will be taken to strengthen 
irrigation management: 
• Efforts will be m ade to reduce irrigation cost by im proving irrigation ef ficiency, 
promoting appropriate technology, in creasing irrigation com mand area and 
upgrading irrigation management. 
Agriculture Policy 7

• With a view to expanding irrigation f acilities the present policy of liberal imports of 
irrigation equipm ent will continue. Measures will be taken to reduce prices of 
irrigation equipments by creating favourable conditions for a competitive market and 
encouraging the private sector participation in irrigation development programmes. 
• With a view to increasing efficiency of overall irrigation m anagement, applied 
education programmes for the farmers will be taken in line with the National W ater 
Resources Development Plan. 
• Irrigation from surface water will get priority and suitable programmes will be taken 
up for the expansion and consolidation of appropriate technology. Em phasis will be 
given on the conjunctive use of ground a nd surface water in accordance with the 
National Water Policy and Water Resources Development Plan of the government. 
• Infrastructures will be built for capturing surface water from khals, beels and sm all 
rivers and increasing availability of i rrigation water by using high capacity power 
pumps. Besides, small rivers, khals, dighi, derelict ponds, etc. which have been silted 
up will be re-excavated so as to augm ent water f low f or expanding irrigation 
facilities. Such water bodies will be used for fish production while tree plantation 
will be done on the two sides of khals. 
• Since the cost of irrigation by electrically operated equipments is lower with higher 
efficiency, priority will be given to electricity connections and supplies for irrigation 
pumps. 
• In severe and extrem ely severe drought affected areas, governm ent decision for 
strengthening supplem entary irrigation during the transplanted aman season will 
continue. Also required technical supports for electricity reconnection to irrigation 
pumps during the aman season will be provided along with other form s of 
assistance. 
• Location specif ic special program mes will be taken f or the im provement of 
irrigation system . Irrigation program mes will be undertaken following proper 
strategy according to the availability of surface and groundwater. Farm ers will be 
motivated in harvesting rainwater for irri gation, and appropriate programmes will be 
taken for promoting rain-fed farming. Suitable projects will be taken up for building 
water reservoir to capture tidal water a nd thereby expanding m echanised irrigation 
facilities in the coastal areas. In this rega rd, participatory program mes for the local 
beneficiaries will be undertaken. 
• In backward and underdeveloped areas, the governm ent will initially take up 
irrigation programmes. Gradually the privat e sector will be m otivated and provided 
necessary supports for developing ways and m eans of expanding irrigation along 
with the marketing and installation of appropriate irrigation technologies. 
• Private sector initiatives f or repair and m aintenance of irrigation equipm ent at the 
local level will be encouraged further. Special program mes will be undertaken to 
provide technical assistance for increasing technical com petence including credit 
support for the promotion of mechanics' services at the local level. 
• Necessary training and technical assistance will be given to the f armers for reducing 
water loss through increased efficiency of the irrigation system and increasing 
command areas per pump. 
Agriculture Policy 8

• For ensuring optim um utilisation of water, intensity of crop production will be 
increased through crop diversification pr ogramme based on the identification of 
suitable cropping patterns. Under the crop diversification programme, farmers will 
be m otivated through the introduction of suitable irrigation m ethods for growing 
different crops. 
• Irrigation management system will be regularly monitored and the required data will 
be collected and analysed in order to provide guidelines for im provement. Adequate 
steps will be taken to deliver inf ormation on irrigation equipm ents regularly to the 
farmers and traders who are investing in irrigation equipments. 
• Coordinated steps will be taken in collabor ation with the concerned agencies to 
effectively m onitor how underground water level fluctuates over tim e or what 
possible impact it might have on irrigation development in future. 
• Measures will be taken to m inimise any a dverse impact of the withdrawal of siting 
and standardisation requirem ents through pr oper advice to the farm ers and creating 
awareness about the technical and financial im plications of the dense installations of 
irrigation equipments. 
• Research will be strengthened in order to assess the present status and determ ine 
future programmes on the availability of irrigation water, utilisation and im pact of 
irrigation technologies, etc. 
• Reservoirs will be built-up to tap water from the year-round stream flow in hilly 
areas and appropriate inf rastructure will be developed f or irrigation as well as f ish 
culture. 
 
7. Pest Management 
7.1 Integrated Pest Managem ent (IPM) will be the m ain policy f or controlling pests and 
diseases. More importance will be given to th e following activities for pest control under the 
Agriculture Policy: 
• Farmers will be m otivated to use m ore pest resistant varieties of crops. Modern 
cultivation practices will be f ollowed so that the incidence of pest inf estation is 
reduced. 
• Use of m echanical control m easures such as light trap, hand net, etc. will be 
increased and popularised. Biological contro l m easures will be used to destroy 
harmful insects and preserve the useful ones. 
• Regular training and discussion programmes on IPM will be conducted among the 
farmers under the supervision of Union Agricultural Developm ent Com mittee 
with a view to successful introduction and popularisation of the m ethod at the 
farmers' level. 
• Pest surveillance and monitoring system will be strengthened. 
7.2 Chemical pesticides will only be used in cases where IPM f ails to control the pests. 
The following measures will be taken in respect of distribution and use of chemical pesticides 
in the light of existing rules and regulations: 
Agriculture Policy 9

• Production, import, distribution or use of any chemical pesticide will be banned 
which is directly or indirectly harmful for human, animal and aquatic health. 
• Use of any chem ical pesticide harm ful f or natural environm ent will be 
discouraged and eventually banned. 
• The system of approval of pesticides at the national level will be continued and its 
monitoring along with the testing of effec tiveness of approved pesticides will be 
strengthened. 
 
8. Agricultural Mechanisation 
8.1 The serious scarcity of draft power nece ssitates the use of m echanical power f or 
agricultural production activities. The government has, therefore, attached special importance 
to agricultural m echanisation. To encourage the use of m achines in agriculture testing and 
standardization restrictions have already b een withdrawn in the free m arket distribution 
system. As a result the use of agricultural machinery has increased significantly and immense 
potential is created for further increase. In orde r to accelerate the current trend of agricultural 
mechanisation, various facilities including ex emption of im port duties on agricultural 
machinery have been provided and the same will continue. 
8.2 The following steps will be taken to promote agricultural mechanisation: 
• The type of agricultural m achines or th e level of m echanisation needed in any 
region depends on the socio-econom ic condition of the people, num ber and 
quality of draft anim als and availability of agricultural labour in that region. 
Measures will be taken to collect and publicize these inform ations through the 
mass media in order to attract private investment in this sector. 
• In order to gradually reduce dependence on draft power, ef forts will be m ade to 
grow farmers' interest on m echanisation as well as to provide credit f acilities. To 
achieve this goal, inf ormation relating to increasing potential dem and f or and 
profitable investm ent in agricultural machinery will be publicized through the 
mass m edia so that the private sector can play an active role in creating a 
competitive market. 
• Despite increasing use of m echanical pow er in agriculture, the use of anim al 
power will continue in future depending on the socio-econom ic conditions of the 
farmers in different regions. Therefor e, im proved ' power delivery system ' 
(meaning delivery of energy from the shoulder of the draft power to the 
agricultural implement) will be evolved th rough research so that the scarce draft 
power can be utilized more efficiently. 
• Production and im port of agricultural m achines will be especially encouraged so 
that the farm ers can procure m achines from the m arket according to their choice 
and convenience. Machinery workshops a nd industries engaged in agricultural 
mechanisation activities will be provided with appropriate taxes/duties f acilities 
for the im port of necessary raw m aterials. This is expected to keep the m achine 
prices within the purchasing capacity of the farmers. 
Agriculture Policy 10

• To speed up the process of agricultural mechanisation both producers and users of 
machines will be provided with necessary credit supports. 
• Use of m achines, which are usually expe nsive, is not often affordable by the 
individual farmers. In order to popularize m echanisation in addition to the use of 
draft power, f armers will be m otivated in purchasing or taking lease of 
agricultural machines through the cooperativ es. Formation of such self-m otivated 
cooperatives will be encouraged and necessary supports will be extended to 
mechanised cultivation based on cooperatives. 
 
 
9. Agriculture Research 
9.1 A well - coordinated research plan is esse ntial for the rapid developm ent of the crop 
sector. With a view to transform ing crop production system into a profitable and sustainable 
sector, a two-dimensional agricultural research management programme will be followed. On 
the one hand, priorities will be given to devel op low-cost appropriate technologies for the 
small, m arginal and m edium farm ers includi ng wom en with a view to resolving their 
identified problems. While, on the other hand, a pplied research will be strengthened through 
advanced research m ethodology by providing n ecessary research facilities. The following 
steps will be taken to fulfill the expected goals of agricultural research: 
• Social, econom ic and m arketing research program mes of all the National 
Agricultural Research Institutes and the Departm ent of Agricultural Marketing 
(DAM) will be strengthened in order to determ ine the econom ic importance of 
crop production. 
• The National Agricultural Research System (NARS), already established by the 
government, will be further strengthe ned and coordinated through periodic 
evaluation. 
• The program me already undertaken to tr ansfer and popularise the technologies 
evolved by different agricultural research institutes through the private sector and 
NGOs at the field level will continue. 
9.2 National Agricultural Research Institutes w ill, in principle, give priorities to the 
following subjects in preparing their time-bound and target oriented research programmes: 
• Soil and agro-ecological Zone (AEZ) specific research; 
• Research relating to the developm ent and application of f ertilisers which are 
harmless for soil quality, environment and health; 
• Research on preservation and developm ent of land productivity in different 
regions; 
• Region-wise research on irrigate and rain-fed cultivation; 
• Farm m anagement research with a view to m inimising production cost and 
maximising farmers' income; 
• Research on identifying different regions of the country from the economic point 
of view as the m ost suitable and pr ofitable for specific crops and cropping 
patterns; 
• Research on preservation of existing bio-diversity of different crops; 
Agriculture Policy 11

• Research relating to IPM and developm ent and application of pesticides from 
indigenous plants; 
• Research on improving quality and utility of various crops; 
• Research on m eeting the increasing demand for food-based nutrition through 
increasing crop diversity; 
• Agro-economic research on the trend and im pact of dom estic and export 
demands for different crops; 
• Research on preservation and processing of crops and reduction of crop losses; 
• Research on enhanced participation of wom en in agricultural activities and 
removal of constraints; 
• Research relating to the developm ent of crop varieties and technologies suitable 
for drought and flooded conditions; 
• Research on developing short duration im proved varieties of seeds for different 
crops; 
• Agronomic and economic research on crop diversification; 
• Research on the developm ent of im proved crop varieties and technologies 
suitable for cultivation in coastal, hilly, water logged and salinity affected areas; 
• Research on developing im proved varieties and technologies for the deep water 
rice; 
• Research on developing technologies for integrated rice cum fish culture; and 
• Research on marketing and price trends of different crops. 
 
 
10. Agriculture Extension 
10.1 Agriculture extension is one of the m ain com ponents of the National Agriculture 
Policy. There is a need for strengthening agricultural extension service for ensuring proper 
use of agricultural land and im proving land productivity. The Departm ent of Agricultural 
Extension (DAE) has got the responsibility of providing inform ation on appropriate 
technologies to the farm ers; educating the farmers through proper advice and training; and, 
thereby m otivating the farm ers to adopt im proved technologies. To strengthen the above 
mentioned extension services, following steps will be taken: 
• The New Agricultural Extension Policy ( NAEP) is currently under im plementation 
with the objective of prom oting sustainable technology for a gradual developm ent 
of the im proved crop production system . The im plementation of NAEP will be 
reinforced through necessary monitoring. 
• Agricultural research-extension linkage will be further strengthened with a view to 
transferring new technologies to the farm ers, Private sector entrepreneurs, NGOs 
and farmers will also be involved in strengthening this linkage. 
10.2 The present agricultural extension set-up is sufficiently broad-based and bolstered by 
efficient m anpower. The following m easures will be taken to m ake this organization m ore 
efficient and effective: 
Agriculture Policy 12

• DAE will prepare f easible and com patible program mes f or the proper use of 
cultivable land on the basis of dem and fo r different crops and their production 
targets. 
• DAE will regularly m onitor the supply and availability of quality seeds, 
fertilizers, irrigation, pesticides, etc, in order to facilitate the cultivation of 
different crops. Besides, DAE will prepare an anticipated report on the 
increase/decrease of crop-wise dem and for different inputs and apprise the 
authorities at the national level. 
• The use of public m ass m edia i.e. radi o, television, newspaper, etc. will be 
increased for rapid extension of agricu ltural technologies. In this connection 
Agriculture Information Service will be strengthened. 
• Proper use of Annual Developm ent Plan (ADP) allocations to local governm ent 
will be ensured. Block-wise establishm ent of dem onstration f arms which is 
already in practice will be strengthene d. Suitable crops, com patible with the 
overall conditions of the f arms will be determ ined by DAE. Visits to 
demonstration farms and interaction with the farm ers by the extension workers at 
an important time of the respective cropping season will be further strengthened. 
• To facilitate rapid transfer of agri cultural production technologies, m ultiple 
extension approaches such as agricultural fair, field day, f armers' rally, etc. will 
be widely practiced. 
• Agriculture extension service will be strengthened to encourage self m otivated 
cooperative system of production. 
 
11. Agriculture Marketing 
11.1 Marketing of agricultural com modity is inextricably related to its production. But the 
Department of Agricultural Marketing (DAM) remains as the weakest of all the existing 
organizations in the agriculture sector. Mark ets f or agricultural com modities are generally 
under m iddlemen's control, which is very discour aging for the farm ers. This is not at all 
favourable for boosting agricultural production. To develop agricultural m arketing system , 
following steps will be taken by the government: 
• Proper m arketing network will be establis hed to f acilitate tim ely m arketing of 
agricultural commodities. To this end, de velopment programmes will be taken up to 
promote processing of agricultural com modities and ensure f air prices of crops to 
both the growers and the consumers. 
• The Department of Agricultural Marketing will be restructured with the provision of 
required m anpower for its sm ooth functioning. A separate institution nam ed 
'Agriculture Price Commission' will be established for preparing adequate marketing 
programmes, giving proper guidelines and implementation of m arketing activities 
along with strengthening of the DAM. 
11.2 In preparing m arketing program mes the following points will be taken into 
consideration: 
Agriculture Policy 13

• Crops will be stored and preserved in prope r conditions to ensure their uninterrupted 
supplies throughout the year as well as to cope with the over production of crops. 
The use of any harmful chemical in this process will be controlled. 
• Timely supply of right quantities of crops at right places will be ensured through the 
development of transportation system. 
• Processing facilities will be developed to reduce wastage of rapidly perishable crops, 
increase utility and maintain quality of agricultural commodities. 
• Export of agricultural com modities w ill be increased through grading and 
standardization. Also, to increase local consumption of such crops, necessary 
measures will be taken for grading, standardization, labeling and quality 
development according to consumers' taste and preference and food value. 
• Efficiency and effectiveness of m arketing program mes will be im proved through 
proper development of market places and related physical infrastructure. 
• Market related information would be supplied to the farmers, traders and consumers 
through strengthening of market information service. 
• Consumers/users, traders and processors will be inform ed about the production, 
utilization and processing technology, etc. of new crops. 
• Necessary assistance will be provided in solving m arketing problem s at the 
government and non-governm ent levels by establishing m arketing database and 
analysing the data. 
• Agricultural Com modity Market Contro l Act of 1964 (revised in 1985) will be 
updated and implemented. 
• To ensure fair prices of crops, measures will be taken to establish linkage among the 
producers, traders, exporters and processors through 'contract sale' of crops. 
• Self-motivated cooperative marketing system will be encouraged. 
• Necessary output price supports will be provided and foodgrain procurem ent will be 
strengthened in order to ensure fair pri ce of crops during the harvesting season and 
to stabilize price when any crop damage or over production occurs. 
 
12. Land Use 
12.1 Government has the prim ary respons ibility of ensuring optim um use of land. 
Although land is a privately owned property in gene ral, its use has to be com patible with the 
overall social goals and utility. Moreover, it is important to consider that the interests of small 
arid marginal farmers and the sharecroppers are protected, as they constitute the m ajority of 
farmers. 
12.2 Following steps will be taken to ensure planned utilization of land for crop 
 production: 
• Land zoning program me will be taken up by the Soil Resources Developm ent 
Institute (SRDI) on a priority basis. Integr ated approach of SRDI will be f urther 
strengthened for this purpose. 
Agriculture Policy 14

• To ensure m aximum utilization of land, bottom up planning through people' s 
participation and its implementation will be started from the mouza or village level. 
• In most areas the same land is suitable for more than one crop. Therefore, farm ers will 
be encouraged to grow m ore profitable cr ops as an alternative to only rice-rice 
cropping pattern. 
• Fertile agricultural land is going out of cultivation due to its use for non-agricultural 
purposes such as private construction, hous e building, brickfield, etc. Appropriate 
measures will be taken to stop this tre nd in the light of the Land Policy of the 
government. 
• Maximum utilization of land will be ensure d through promotion of inter-cropping with 
the main crops. 
• Acquisition of land in excess of requirem ent for non-agricultural purposes will be 
discouraged. 
• Programmes will be taken up to m otivate the landowners not to keep their land unused 
without any acceptable reason. 
• Appropriate measures will be taken in the light of the Land Policy so that the interests 
of sm all and m arginal farm ers and the sharecroppers are protected and that the 
agricultural land is not kept fallow for a long period. 
 
 
13. Agricultural Education and Training 
13.1 One specific objective of the Agriculture Po licy is to develop efficient m anpower in 
agricultural disciplines in order to increase th e rate of production on a sustained basis. To 
expand the scope of agricultural educati on Bangobondhu Agricultural University has been- 
established side by side with the Bangladesh Agricultural University. In the light of the 
National Education Policy, policies adopted by of the governm ent for expansion of 
agricultural education and training are as follows: 
• Steps will be taken to im prove and st rengthen the adm inistrative and academ ic 
management of agricultural colleges es tablished by the governm ent. Appropriate 
measures will be taken, if necessary, to facilitate coordination and reform s in the 
administrative management of these colleges; 
• Number of agricultural education institutions will be increased up to the required 
level. A pre-determined standard and f acilities will be ensured f or establishing and 
managing any agricultural college. 
• All the agricultural colleges will be m anaged according to the curricula and 
examination rules of the relevant universitie s. Adequate m easures will be taken to 
facilitate higher studies, research and on th e job promotion for the teaching staff of 
agricultural colleges. 
• Steps will be taken to strengthen the t echnical standards, adm inistration and 
management of 13 Agricultural Training Institutes (ATI) offering diploma courses. 
Agriculture Policy 15

• Departmental training f or the agriculture of ficials will be f urther strengthened and 
efforts to upgrade the practical knowledge of the Block Supervisors through regular 
in-service training will be continued. 
14.1 It has been concluded in different studies that the agricultural credit advanced by the 
financial institutions (banks) is not easily available to the farm ers. On the other hand, 
Grameen Bank and quite a num ber of NGOs are giving credit to the farm ers, although 
much of that credit is being used for non-agricultural purposes. However, the m ajor 
proportion of agricultural credit still com es from the financial institutions. But the 
amount of credit that is available from this institutional source fulfills only an 
insignificant portion of the total credit requirement. 
14.2 In the past Agricultural Credit Com mittees were form ed at the district, thana and 
union levels to monitor credit distribution. But, except the district level committee, two other 
committees have virtually becom e ineffectiv e. Even the district com mittees are not 
performing their m onitoring job regularly in all the districts. There is no such institutional 
structure f or m onitoring agricultural credit program me at the national level, except the 
Bangladesh Bank. However, the status of m onthly loan disbursem ent and its recovery is 
being m onitored by the Finance Division be sides Bangladesh Bank. In this situation, 
government policies regarding agricultural credit are as follows: 
• To achieve the desired goal of the Agricultu re Policy, regular monitoring at all levels 
of credit distribution will be strengthe ned. A m onitoring and evaluation com mittee 
will be formed at the national level under the chairmanship of the Honorable Finance 
Minister for this purpose. The Honorable Minister for Agriculture will act as the 
alternate chairman for this committee. This committee will consist of the Governor of 
the Bangladesh Bank, Secretary of the Finan ce Division, Secretary of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Member (Agriculture) of Planning Commission, Managing Directors of 
all the governm ent financial institution, Di rector General of the Departm ent of 
Agricultural Extension (DAE) and Direct or General of the Bangladesh Rural 
Development Board (BRDB). One repres entative from the private: sector 
organisations, one each from Farmers' Organization and Krishibid Organization and 
three representatives from the NGOs involve d in agricultural developm ent activities, 
nominated by the governm ent will also be included in the com mittee as m embers. 
This committee will provide overall guidelines for the implementation of institutional 
agricultural credit program me and m ake recom mendations to the governm ent for 
necessary actions through reviewing the overall credit situation. Besides, the 
committee will regularly monitor the status of agricultural credit at the national level. 
• Activities of the district agricultu ral credit com mittee form ed under the 
chairmanship of the Deputy Com missioner w ill be strengthened. The district level 
regional managers/highest officials of a ll nationalized and specialized banks. Deputy 
Director of DAB of the respective district . District Rural Developm ent Officer of 
BRDB, Regional Manager of BADC, re presentative from NGOs involved in 
agricultural developm ent activities and tw o progressive f armers nom inated by the 
government will be included as m embers of this com mittee. Regional 
Manager/highest of ficial of the nationa lized lead bank will act as the m ember-
secretary of the com mittee. This com mittee will regularly m onitor and review the 
agricultural credit programme for its successful implementation at the field level. The 
Agriculture Policy 16

committee will determine the demand and target for agricultural credit on the basis of 
recommendations m ade by the thana and union com mittees and accordingly 
recommend to the national committee. 
• Thana and union level com mittees will be ac tivated. Thana Nirbahi Of ficer will be 
the Chairman of the thana committee. All union parishad chairm en of the respective 
thana, managers of all the thana level governm ent banks, Thana Agriculture Officer 
and Thana Rural Developm ent Of ficer w ill be the m ember of this com mittee. 
Manager of the thana level governm ent lead bank will act as the m ember- secretary 
of the com mittee. Besides, this com mittee will be strengthened by including two 
progressive farm ers of the respective th ana and a representative from the NGOs 
involved in agricultural developm ent activities as m embers who will be 
recommended by the district com mittee in c onsultation with the concerned m ember 
of the parliam ent. This com mittee will revi ew the perf ormance of agricultural credit 
distribution and recovery through the uni on agricultural credit com mittee and take 
necessary actions locally for improving the situation. 
• Union parishad chairm an will be the Ch airman of the union agricultural credit 
committee. Respective ward m ember of uni on parishad and Block Supervisor of 
DAE will be included in this committee as members. Local bank manager or the field 
supervisor will be the m ember-secretary of the committee. In order to strengthen the 
committee one representative from the local NGOs and two progressive farm ers will 
be included in the com mittee. The respons ibilities of this com mittee will be to: (i) 
prepare a list of potential reci pients of agricultural credit on an annual basis; (ii) fix 
the target f or agricultural credit and recom mend that to the higher authority; (iii) 
monitor regularly whether the credit is bei ng distributed in tim e; and (iv) provide 
necessary assistance for loan recovery. 
14.3 In each of the union, thana, district and national agricultural credit com mittees, 
women representatives nom inated by the govern ment will be included as m embers. The 
inclusion of elected wom en representatives in the union and thana agricultural credit 
committees will be made compulsory. 
14.4 The government has been continuing efforts to simplify the procedures of agricultural 
credit disbursem ent. Meanwhile, som e new polic ies have already been introduced to this 
effect. But the banks/f inancial institutions have to direct their credit distribution system by 
maintaining a balance between the sim plification strategy and credit recovery as those 
institutions are to ensure recovery of dis bursed credit, which constitutes the depositors' 
money. The com mittees on agricultural credit at dif ferent levels will basically act as the 
facilitators in disbursing and recovery of cr edit by monitoring, motivating people in repaying 
loans, recommendations through enquiry of com plaints and overall coordination, etc. W hile 
the loan sanction will solely rem ain with th e concerned Bank and the respective branch of 
that Bank will be liable for recovery. 
14.5 In order to m ake agricultural credit m ore accessible, program me of advancing bank 
loan with an increasing rate will be continue d. Besides, the Ministry of Agriculture has 
prepared an outline of an institution titled 'Agricultural Credit Foundation' following the 
model of Palli Karm a Shahayak Foundation to st rengthen the agricultural credit system . The 
Agricultural Credit Foundation will be a non-pr ofit organization under the Com pany Act of 
1994 with the prim ary objective of increasing investm ent in agricultural activities through 
Agriculture Policy 17

meeting the dem and for credit by the landless, m arginal and sm all farmers; and at the sam e 
time to alleviate, poverty and raise the overa ll living standard by creating new em ployment 
opportunities through intensification of crop cu ltivation and agricultural diversification. 
Programmes will be taken up to identify di fferent governm ent, sem i-government, non- 
government development agencies and social orga nisations as the ' partner organisations' to 
channel micro credit through them for this purpos e. Necessary steps will be taken during the 
current Fifth Five-Year Plan (FFYP) period for establishing this institutional entity. 
15. Government Support for Agricultural Production and 
 Contingency Plan 
15.1 It is necessary to take up supportive program mes by the governm ent for encouraging 
farmers in using m odern technologies in orde r to increase crop production. Steps to be taken 
by the government in this respect are: 
• Government support m ay be provided to fa nners in a num ber of ways, such as, 
reducing prices of agricultural inputs, ensuring fair prices for agricultural 
products, exem pting duties and taxes, sharing the cost of supplem entary 
irrigation, lowering the rates of interest on agricultural credit etc. A provision of 
block allocation for the Ministry of Ag riculture will be kept in the Annual 
Development Programme (ADP) for this purpose. This money will only be used 
for the agricultural support programmes of the government. 
• Government will undertake contingency support program mes to m ake of the 
farmers' loss due to any natural disaster . A provision of block allocation will be 
kept in the revenue head for the Ministry of Agriculture for this purpose. 
• The Ministry of Agriculture will have a contingency plan f or taking up 
emergency agricultural rehabilitation program mes (ARP) to recover f rom the 
crop losses due to any natural disaster at both the farmers' and national levels. 
• Early warning system will be strengthened to inform the farmers about their roles 
in an adverse weather condition on the ba sis of specific inform ation analysis. A 
plan is being prepared by the Departm ent of Agricultural Extension (DAE) for 
providing ' extension m essage' on the ba sis of agro-m eteorology. An agro-
meteorological centre will be established in the DAE f or this purpose. The m ain 
function of this centre will be to analy ze agro-meteorological and agro-clim atic 
data and forecast the sowing/transplanti ng time and possible yields of crops to 
the farmers as well as to provide agro-meteorological advises. 
 
16. Food-based Nutrition 
16.1 As a follow up to the World Declaration of the International Conference on Nutrition, 
1992, the following agriculture related programmes are identified: 
• Improving nutritional objectives, com ponents and considerations into 
development policies and programmes. 
• Improving food security down to the household level. 
• Protecting consumers through improved food quality and food safety. 
Agriculture Policy 18

16.2 The government has already approved the National Food and Nutrition Policy and the 
National Plan of Action on Nutrition in the light of unanim ously adopted resolutions of the 
above-mentioned conference. In this perspective efforts are being m ade to increase 
production and supply of nutritious crops and thus improve the status of food-based nutrition 
through implementing nutritional program mes in the agriculture sector. These developm ent 
activities will be continued. 
 
17. Environmental Protection in Agriculture 
17.1 One of the objectives of the National Agricultu re Policy is to create awareness so that 
the chemical fertilizers and pesticides used for increased crop production do not turn out to be 
responsible for environmental pollution. 
17.2 Water logging and salinity are appearing to be a serious problem in some parts of the 
country including the coastal areas which is not only a threat to the agricultural activities in 
those areas but also can cause a great dam age of the overall environm ent. The steps to be 
taken by the government in this respect are: 
• Measures will be taken to resist water logging and the farm ers will be 
motivated to f ollow appropriate crop rotation as well as to practice crop and 
fish culture by turns. 
 Salt tolerant crop varieties will be developed and extended along with possible 
measures to resist salinity. 
• Considering the environmental hazards associated with the im plementation of 
crop production policy, necessary step s will be taken to protect the 
environment in the light of the a pproved National Environm ent and W ater 
Policies. 
• Although earning of foreign exchange is largely attributed to the shrim p 
culture in the southern saline areas, saline water together with shrim p 
disposals in shrim p enclosures and ad jacent areas have been appearing as a 
source of environmental pollution. In this respect, realistic steps will be taken 
in the light of the already formulated Fisheries Policy. 
 
18. Women in Agriculture 
18.1 In the socio-economic context of Bangladesh, involvement of women in agriculture is 
very im portant. It would be easier to contro l rural-urban m igration by engaging wom en in 
agricultural activities to a greater extent. Cons idering wom en's involvem ent in agriculture, 
the following program mes will be taken up for enhancing their role under the scope of the 
National Agriculture Policy: 
• Agriculture related activities like post harvest operations, seed preservation, 
nursery business, jute stripping, vegetable cultivation, hom estead gardening, 
floriculture, production of horticultural seeds, establishm ent and m anagement 
of cottage industries based on locally produced agricultural com modities, etc. 
are very suitable f or wom en. Extensive training program mes will be 
Agriculture Policy 19

conducted and capital support will be provi ded to encourage wom en's interest 
and improve their skill in such activities. 
• Separate extension programme will be organized for women in the light of the 
New Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP), as they also take part in the 
production of field crops. 
• Appropriate research program me will be undertaken to identify constraints 
with regard to wom en's participation in agricultural activities and m easures 
will be taken to remove those identified constraints. 
 
19. Coordination among the Government, NGOs and Private 
 Sector 
19.1 It is not possible for the governm ent or NGOs or the private sector alone to solve the 
whole range of problem s or to fully explore the prospects of the agriculture sector. Since the 
problems are complex and widespread in agricu lture on the one hand, and available resource 
base is very lim ited on the other, the activities of governm ent, private, farm ers and non-
government organizations will be coordina ted in the following m anner for the overall 
development of agriculture sector: 
• Private sector agencies and NGOs will have the opportunity to participate in any 
programme related to the developm ent of agriculture sector. But the governm ent 
will reserve the right to postpone or ban any activity, which is considered to be 
inconsistent with the National Agriculture Policy. 
• Activities of the governm ent, private organization and NGOs involved in 
agricultural developm ent will be brought under a well-organized m onitoring 
system and will be coordinated f rom the national to f ield level. One agriculture 
committee will be form ed at each of the national, district, thana and union levels 
to consider the issues related to overall agriculture as well as to coordinate the 
activities of all concerned m inistries and agencies involved. The National 
Agriculture Com mittee will be form ed under the chairm anship of Hon' ble 
Minister for Agriculture. Sim ilarly, from the district to union levels, respective 
chairman of the local governm ent institutions will be responsible for holding the 
chair of the agriculture com mittees at each of the district, thana and union levels. 
One representative f rom the f armers' organization will be included as a m ember 
in the agriculture committees at each level. 
 
20. Reliable Database 
20.1 Successful im plementation of a devel opment program me largely depends on the 
availability of reliable data and inf ormation in time. Following measures will be taken by the 
government under the National Agriculture Policy to build up a reliable database: 
• Adequate physical facilities will be created at the district level DAE offices. 
• District level DAE of fices will collect, compile and preserve all inf ormation 
related to crop sector through their official channels. For this purpose, adequate 
computer facilities and skilled manpower will be mobilized. 
Agriculture Policy 20

• Agriculture related information would be preserved and displayed publicly. 
• Government, private sector agencies and NGOs involved in agriculture sector will 
in principle agree to exchange information among them. 
• Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics will organize training programmes on appropriate 
methods of data collection and preser vation for the concerned agencies and 
provide advice in this regard. 
 
21. Conclusion 
21.1 The proper implementation of the National Agriculture Policy will transform the crop 
production system, and for that matter the overall agriculture into a dynamic sector over time, 
which is expected to bring about significant positive changes in the econom y of the country. 
In respect of tim e, The National Agriculture Policy will be evaluated and reviewed in the 
context of overall economic condition of the country and the changing agricultural production 
system and accordingly measures will be taken to update this Policy. 
Agriculture Policy 21