Wreet tee Tg TS 
ACTH few 
 Bangladesh % @ 
BANGLADESH 
NATIONAL FOOD AND NUTRITION SECURITY POLICY 
PLAN OF ACTION 
2021-2030 
 ET a sede 
 
 
 Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU) 
 
Ministry of Food 
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh

Fv Sea) OR 
Bangladesh \ 4 &) 
 
National Food and Nutrition Security Policy 
Plan of Action (2021-2030) 
Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU) 
Ministry of Food 
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
September 2021

Contents 
Message from Honorable Minister, Ministry of Food 
Message from Secretary, Ministry of Food 
Message from FAO Representative in Bangladesh 
Preface from Director General, FPMU, Ministry of Food 
ACTON PINS ANd ADBLSVIATIONS ...,-..crayorersorserersovonessesterorsonensspeocereernnrayerengonseseneorerennrererergecenresepvoenessepyes i 
BEROCUURVE SUENTALY asscasasccccassiencakesicctatati chase seANSUNGETS te GaNISAECCEVENGORAST Tha LAN GRASSECASGNADKGSESSta Yabo RCS CSN CCaCaISS Vii 
LS FATRUREER Nase cae ceceseeeedea teeta oon PE aR NN SORT ODN COOLER A ee PEP CONN NFL Ls Neo LETC Eo | 
2. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 1 of the POA .0.....ccccsccesssecseseesisssesenennerensrenesgeneneesenseateans 6 
3. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 2 of the POA o....:0...c000..0cccsecces cece cece ecasesiteessenseeeseeess 29 
4, Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 3 of the POA ............c:eccceseserersesreeereesessensenraseneparentearenes 55 
5, Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 4 of the POA ........cccceccsesssescorsessenseecostensvenssenevaeeesbersenenevenes 73 
6. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 5 of the POA woo... cececcccceeeeecceseeeesecseseeesecssseeeeess 9) 
Tex aE RTE AT RTO NII eccsu peeps ern eyL ser tye TCHULASHUNLFOREASENSLEL@EE LVR EETe AL ONUNN SERN PEREEN COUPES TESS) 122 
8. Responsible Actors and Coordination ...:....0ccccieesssavesnseseovererstducensensetesenstsavensseveseassetostsnnssbaleenreseseonsss 186 
Bo, FEROS sn sence nraxemcennsyenrerarrnovsonsnnsenoncastenveaennsdanleeeserensen santryeyars sen senern ane aya teu iaunsDNONeAADLeNSeRaRseLehEaNonetres 190) 
Annex |; List of Acts, national policies, strategic and planning documents 
cross-referenced in Tie POA sic irecca eich icant cena aa ba babes ii 192 
Annex 2: Comments from the Regional Consultations consolidated by region 
and: NENSP. QbjCctves:. ssssiscassiccsissssestisscensasassicennsstbkeea calaasscaasecisieeacatabuenncoiscouanatteceusetizasens 194 
Annex 3: Comments from the Thematic Team and Stakeholder Consultations 
bY GRORHVG hss a ccunicoeiaceaeesau ee eRe ane TRe 204

x | eau 
gar STziml & " 
Bangladesh % @) 
 
 
Honorable Minister 
Ministry of Food 
Govt. of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
MESSAGE 
 
 
Message on the eve of celebration of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's birth centenary, 
and coinciding with the golden Jubilee of our country's independence, the National Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy (NFNSP) 2020 was unveiled by the Ministry of Food (MoFood). The Policy was approved by the Government 
of Bangladesh (GoB) in August 2020. This ten-year Plan of Action (PoA) of the NFNSP (2020) has been prepared 
based on the five core objectives of the policy, to ensure food and nutrition security for all and achieve the sustain- 
able development goals (SDGs) by 2030. 
Bangladesh has shown remarkable success in agricultural production following agricultural modernization practices 
contributing to improvement in the food and nutrition security (FNS) situation of its population. The advent of 
COVID-19 pandemic has affected all countries of the world, threatening to decelerate the progress made. The GoB has 
taken measures to ensure that FNS of the poor and vulnerable is assured. The population of Bangladesh is projected to 
reach over 186 million by 2030. Against this backdrop, the GoB is committed to achieve FNS for all, at all times, to 
ensure an active and healthy life. It has also pledged to the global Agenda 2030 for sustainable development that 
includes ending poverty (SDG-1), eradicating hunger and food insecurity, and achieving improved nutrition (SDG-2) by 
2030. 
Considering multi-dimensional objectives of the NFNSP, the PoA has been prepared by the Food Planning and Monitor- 
ing Unit (FPMU) of the Ministry of Food following a consultative process with thematic teams from different ministnes 
and with technical support from the Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAQ), It provides a framework for all responsible GoB agencies and FNS stake- 
holders for effective implementation, coordination and monitoring of the policy. The ten-year PoA covers the Eighth and 
Ninth Five Year Plan periods and aligns with the GoB priority of achieving FNS-related SDGs and fulfilling relevant 
national and international commitments by 2030. 
The PoA includes actions required in order to, ensure the availability of safe and nutritious food at an affordable price, 
and enhance the consumption and utilization of healthy and diversified diets for achieving nutrition improvement by 
implementing the priority actions. It recommends nutrition-sensitive social protection and safety nets across the lifecy- 
cle with a focus on yulnerable groups and regions, in order to ensure accessibility, Coordination, data management, 
capacity building, partnership, and governance for effective policy implementation are key to realising the NFNSP 
objectives and are an important part of the PoA. 
I believe this NFNSP PoA provides a framework for strengthening nutrition-sensitive food systems and realising the 
commitment of the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh to ensure safe and nutritious food for all. 
Joi Bangla, Joi Bangabandhu 
May Bangladesh Live Forever. 
Sadhan Chandra Majumder, MP

tiv WT ier? =e x 
te, er eee 
Bina ae a 
Bangladesh (S) / til ator oe " U 
q 
 
Secretary 
Ministry of Food 
Govt. of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
MESSAGE 
 
 
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (NFNSP) was approved by the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) 
in August 2020 and aims to ensure that the country achieves its food and nutrition security-related Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and fulfils the relevant national and international commitments by 2030. For the first 
time the GoB has formulated an integrated food and nutrition security (FNS) policy. 
This ten-year NFNSP Plan of Action (PoA)- 2021-2030, has been developed in alignment with current policies and 
plans of action, 8th five-year plan and perspective plan, and combines nutrition-sensitive and nutrition-specific 
approaches, to ensure sustainable food systems and food and nutrition security. 
The Plan of Action translates the policy into a time-bound results-oriented set of priority actions that operationalize 
the five NFNSP's objectives. It provides a guiding framework in key aspects of implementation, coordination, and 
monitoring by all responsible ministries, agencies, and other stakeholders. The PoA covers the 10-year period of the 
Eighth Year Plan (8FYP, July 2020 - June 2025) and Ninth Five Year Plan (9F YP, July 2025 - June 2030), The 
formulation of the PoA was coordinated by the Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), Ministry of Food, and 
technically supported by the Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project of FAO, with funding from 
USAID and the EU. 
The PoA proposes 275 short- to long-term priority actions grouped under 64 Areas of Intervention, across 17 Strat- 
egies, under the five objectives of the policy. It provides a result-oriented framework for monitoring progress and 
guiding effective implementation. The actions proposed cut across scveral ministries and requires that we work in a 
convergent mode. The complexity of the food system is emphasized in the PoA through its five objectives that cover 
the areas of availability of and access to safe and nutritious food, the consumption and utilization of healthy and 
diversified diets for improvement in nutrition outcomes, and nutrition-sensitive social protection and safety nets 
across lifecycle with a focus on vulnerable groups and regions. The last objective brings together cross-cutting 
themes of high relevance to food and nutrition security, namely food safety; food losses and waste; data, informa- 
tion and analysis for evidence-based policy making; regulatory management, climate resilience and gender, and 
governance, policy coherence, capacity strengthening and leadership. 
I believe that timely implementation of this PoA (2021-2030) of the NFNSP 2020, with the cooperative effort of the 
relevant ministries and other stakeholders involved, will enable us to ensure food and nutrition security for all. 
bso Dr. Mosammat Nazmanara Khanum

Food and Leqric uiture Organization 
of the United Nations 
 
Robert D. Simpson 
FAO Representative in Bangladesh 
MESSAGE 
 
Bangladesh has made substantial food and nutrition security progress, as evidenced by the improvement in child 
nutrition outcomes and the reduced prevalence of undernourishment. Even so, challenges remain which have only 
been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Concerted effort is needed to reach the national nutrition targets 
by 2025 and Sustainable Development Goal 2 of Zero Hunger by 2030. 
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (NFNSP) Plan of Action for Bangladesh marks an important step 
to realize these targets and objectives. The Plan of Action translates the NFNSP policy into a framework for imple- 
mentation, coordination, and monitoring by all responsible ministries, agencies, and other stakeholders, 
Supporting the five policy objectives that encompass the key clements from 'production to plate' across the food 
system arel7 strategies, 64 areas of intervention, and 275 short to long-term priority actions: The Food Planning 
and Monitoring Unit, Ministry of Food, formulated the Plan of Action with technical support from FAO's Meeting 
the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project which is funded by the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID) and the European Union (EU) Delegation in Bangladesh. 
The plan of Action results from successful multi-sector, multi-ministerial, and multi-stakeholder co-operation. The 
formulation process involved five thematic teams comprising of officials from the planning wings of 18 line 
ministries and agencies that together work fo ensure food and nutrition security in Bangladesh. Extensive 
consultations were held with stakeholders and partners that included national and local government, 
academia, the private sector, non-governmental and civil society organizations,and development partners. 
FAO looks forward to the implementation and monitoring of this Plan of Action to address both immediate and 
longer-term food and nutrition security challenges in the country. 
Robert D. Simpson

( of 
Se 
 
yes] foe 
Bangladesh (@ 
 
Director General (Additinal Secretary) 
Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU) 
Ministry of Food 
Govt. of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
PREFACE 
 
 
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (NFNSP) Plan of Action (2021 2030) elaborates the actions 
required to realize the five objectives of the NFNSP (2020). It identifies responsible actors (government and 
non-government) and suggests a set of policy targets and indicators for monitoring progress. The document provides 
a set of guidelines regarding inter-ministerial coordination, sectoral planning, and data validation process, for effec- 
tive implementation. Prepared following a multistakeholder consultative process, the Plan of Action (PoA) will 
serve as a guiding framework for implementation of the NFNSP. 
Coordinated by the Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), Ministry of Food, and technically assisted by the 
Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project implemented by FAO with funding from USAID and the 
EU, the PoA formulation process began with a thorough review of the initiatives and strategies proposed under each 
of the five objectives of the NFNSP. Policy consistency has been ensured in the preparation of the PoA following an 
extensive review of the NFP strategic linkages with key policy and planning documents of the government. The PoA 
has 275 priority actions grouped under 64 Areas of Intervention across 17 strategies under the five objectives of the 
Policy. The main purpose of the Po is to provide a result-oriented set of priority actions that contributes to opera- 
tionalize the NFNSP's strategies to meet its objectives. The PoA therefore features a set of specific time-bound 
Areas of Interventions (Aols) and activities to guide implementation, coordination among agencies and monitoring. 
It identifies responsible ministries, departments, and line agencies, specifies the implementation timeframe for each 
activity as well as indicators to be used in the monitoring. 
Preparation of the PoA involved consultations with five inter-ministerial Thematic Teams which include officials 
from seventeen line ministries/government agencies whose work contributes to food and nutrition security, and with 
development partners. The draft Plan of Action was shared in multistakeholder consultations involving public and 
private sector representatives, academia, NGOs and civil society, from March to May 2021, covering all eight 
divisions of the country, to get feedback from a wide cross-section of stakeholders. These culminated in a national 
PoA validation workshop in June 2021, These events had to be conducted virtually in view of the prevailing 
COVID-19 pandemic situation; but all efforts were made to ensure effective participation and close to 500 stake- 
holders engaged in the process. The PoA has been finalised taking into consideration the additional suggestions and 
recommendations received during this consultative process. 
1 wish to emphasize that this Plan of Action is the result of valuable contributions by all stakeholders from the 
Government, UN agencies, donor agencies, international and national NGOs, Civil Society Organizations, and 
youth groups, Its monitoring process builds on the existing FNS institutional coordination framework and follows a 
result-based monitoring mechanism. In short, the NFNSP PoA (2021-2030) provides a roadmap for ensuring food 
and nutrition security for all as envisaged by the NFNSP (2020). 
rer 
Md. Shahiduzzaman Faruki

Acronyms and Abbreviations 
ADB 
ADP 
AIS 
AIDS 
AIMS 
AMIS 
APA 
Aol 
ARDFS 
ARI 
ASEAN 
ASF 
ATI 
BAB 
BADC 
BAEN 
BARC 
BARI 
BAU 
BB 
BBF 
BBS 
BCC 
BDHS 
BDP 
BDT 
BEZA 
BFD 
BFRI 
BFSA 
BFSN 
BHE 
BIGD 
BIHS 
BINA 
BIRDEM 
BIRTAN 
BIRI 
BLRI 
BMDA 
BMET 
BMMS 
BMS 
BNNC 
BNYP 
BRDB 
BRRI 
BSCIC 
BSTI 
BYTE 
Asian Development Bank 
Annual Development Programme 
Agriculture Information Service 
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
Aid Information Mansgement System 
Agricultural Market Information System 
Annual Performance Agreement 
Area of Intervention 
Agriculture, Rural Development and Food Security 
Acute Respiratory Infections 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Animal Source Foods 
Agriculture Training Institute 
Bangladesh Accreditation Board 
Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation 
Bangladesh Extension Network 
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council 
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute 
Bangladesh Agricultural University 
Bangladesh Bank 
Bangladesh Breastfeeding Foundation 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 
Behaviour Change Communication 
Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey 
Bangladesh Delta Plan 
Bangladeshi Taka 
Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority 
Bangladesh Forest Department 
Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute 
Bangladesh Food Safety Authority 
Bangladesh Food Safety Network 
Bureau of Health Education 
BRAC Institute of Governance and Development 
Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey 
Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture 
Bangladesh Institute of Research and Rehabilitation in Diabetes, Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 
Bangladesh Institute of Research and Training on Applied Nutrition 
Bangladesh Jute Research Institute 
Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute 
Barind Multipurpose Development Authority 
Bureau of Manpower, Employment and Training 
Bangladesh Maternal Mortality and Health Care Survey 
Breast Milk Substitutes 
Bangladesh National Nutrition Council 
Bangladesh National Youth Policy 
Bangladesh Rural Development Board 
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute 
Bangladesh Small and Cottage Industries Corporation 
Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institution 
Bangladesh Technical Education Board 
a

BITC 
BWDB 
BWMRI 
CAB 
CGAP 
CIP2 
CMS 
CPI 
CSA 
CSOs 
DAE 
DAM 
DDP 
DEI 
DER 
DGHS 
DG Food 
DGFP 
DLRS 
DLS 
DNCC 
DoF 
DPs 
DPHE 
DTE 
DYD 
BAS 
EGPP 
EPI 
ESCAP 
ESP 
EUREPGAP 
FAO 
FBCCI 
Bangladesh Trade and Tariff Commission 
Bangladesh Water Development Board 
Bangladesh Wheat and Maize Research Institute 
Consumers' Association of Bangladesh 
Climate Fiscal Framework 
Cansultative Group to Assist the Poor 
Chattogram Hill Tracts 
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center 
Country Investment Plan | 
Second Country Investment Plan for Nutrition-Sensitive Food Systems 
Cottage, Micro and Small 
Consumer Price Index 
Climate Resilient Agriculture 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
Climate Smart Agriculture Investment Plan 
Civil Society Organisations 
Climate Vulnerable Forum 
Department of Agricultural Extension 
Department of Agricultural Marketing 
Desirable Dietary Pattern 
Dictary Energy Intake 
Disaster Emergency Response 
Directorate General 
Directorate General of Health Services 
Directorate General of Faod 
Directorate General of Family Planning 
Department of Land Records and Survey 
Department of Livestock Services 
District Nutrition Coordination Committees 
Department of Fishenes 
Development Partners 
Department of Public Health Engineering 
Directorate of Technical Education 
Department of Youth Development 
Extension and Advisory Services 
Employment Generation Programme for the Poorest 
Expanded Programs for Immunization 
Economic Relations Division 
Economie and Social Commission for Asia and the Pavifie 
Essential Health Service Package 
European System Related to Good Agricultural Practice 
Economic Zone 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
Food Composition Table 
Food Based Dietary Guidelines 
Food Friendly Program 
Food for Work 
Farmer's Information and Advisory Centre 
Food Insecurity Experience Scale 
Food Loss Index 
Free Trade Agreement 
Food Value Chain

FLW 
FNS 
FPMA 
FPMC 
FPMU 
FPWG 
FSNIS 
G2P 
GAFSP 
GAIN 
GAP 
GAgP 
GCF 
GDDS 
GDP 
GED 
GFSI 
GHG 
GHP 
GIEWS 
GMP 
GoB 
HACCP 
HIES 
Hi 
HIV 
HPNSP 
HRDC 
ICDDR,B 
ICN2 
ICRISAT 
ICT 
ICVGD 
IFAD 
IFPA 
IFPRI 
IFST 
IMCI 
IMED 
IMF 
INFOSAN 
INFS 
INGO 
INM 
IPC 
IPH 
IPHN 
IPM 
IPNS 
IRRI 
IYCF 
JCS 
JICA 
KGF 
Food Loss and Waste 
Food and Nutrition Security 
Food Price Monitoring and Analysis 
Food Planning and Monitoring Committee 
Food Planning and Monitoring Unit 
Food Policy Working Group 
Food Security and Nutrition Information Systems 
Government-to-Person 
Global Agriculture's Food Sccurity Program 
Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition 
Good Agricultural Practices 
Good Aquaculture Practices 
Green Climate Fund 
General Data Dissemination System 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gencral Economics Division 
Global Food Safety Initiative 
Greenhouse Gas 
Good Hygienic Practices 
Global Information and Early Warning System 
Good Manufacturing Practices 
Government of Bangladesh 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
Household Income and Expenditure Survey 
Hand-in-Hand Initiative 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Health, Population and Nutrition Sector Programme 
Hybrid Rice Development Consortium 
International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh 
Second International Conference on Nutrition 
Intemational Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
Information & Communication Technology 
Investment Component for Vulnerable Group Development 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
Indicator of Food Price Anomalies 
International Food Policy Research Institute 
Institute of Food Science and Technology 
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness 
Implementation Monitoring and Evaluation Division 
International Monctary Fund 
International Food Safety Authority Network 
Institute of Nutrition and Food Science 
International Non-Governmental Organisation 
Integrated Nutrient Management 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
Institute of Public Health 
Institute of Public Health and Nutrition 
Integrated Pest Management 
Integrated Plant Nutrition System 
Intemational Rice Research Institute 
Infant and Young Child Feeding 
Joint Cooperation Strategy 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
Krishi Gobeshona Foundation 
SS

LCG 
LGD 
LGED 
LT 
MAD 
MCS 
MDD 
MDD-W 
MDG 
MFIs 
MFS 
MICS 
MIS 
MMI 
MMD 
MoA 
MoC 
MoEFCC 
MoDMR 
MoE 
MoHA 
MoF 
MoFood 
MoFA 
MoFL 
MoHFW 
Moind 
MolIB 
MoL 
MoLaw 
MoLE 
MoLGRD&C 
MoP 
MoPA 
MoPEMR 
MoPME 
MoST 
Mol 
MoWCA 
MoWR 
MoRA 
MR20 
MSEs 
MSMEs 
MT 
MUCH 
MoYS 
NAP 
NARS 
NBCC 
NBFI 
NC 
NCB 
a iv il 
Local Consultative Group 
Local Government Division 
Local Government Engineering Department 
Long-Term 
Minimum Acceptable Dict 
Monitoring, Control, and Surveillance System 
Minimum Dietary Diversity 
Minimum Dictary Diversity for Women 
Millennium Development Goal 
Microfinance Institutions 
Mobile Financial Service 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 
Management Information System 
Missing Middle Initiative 
Marine Mercantile Department 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Commerce 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Food 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Ministry of Industries 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
Ministry of Land 
Ministry of Law 
Ministry of Labor and Employment 
Ministry of Local Goyernment, Rural Development and Cooperatives 
Ministry of Planning 
Ministry of Public Administration 
Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources 
Ministry of Primary and Mass Education 
Ministry of Science and Technology 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 
Ministry of Water Resources 
Ministry of Religious Affairs 
CIP2 Monitoring Report 2020 
Micro and Small Enterprises 
Micro, Smal! and Medium Enterprises 
Medium Term 
Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge 
Ministry of Youth and Sports 
National Agricultural Policy 
National Agricultural Research System 
Nutrition Behaviour Change Communication 
Non-bank Finance Institutions 
Nutrition Club 
Nutrition Challenge Badge

NCDs. 
NCIP 
NEET 
NEMC 
NFNSP 
NGOs 
NIIPRP 
NIPORT 
NIPU 
NPAN2 
NNP 
NNS 
NSPCMD 
NSSS 
NSVC 
NUS 
OMS 
OP 
PDBF 
PFDS 
PHC 
PKSF 
PLW 
PMO 
PoA 
Po 
PP2041 
PPP 
PPPA 
PwD 
RDCD 
RTWG 
R&D 
SAARC 
SBA 
SBCC 
SDDS 
SDG 
SEZ 
SFB 
SFP 
SMART 
SME 
SOF! 
SOP 
SPARS 
SPARRSO 
SRDI 
Non-Communicable Diseases 
National Council for Intellectual Property 
National Designated Authority 
Not in Education, Employment or Training 
National Environment Management Council 
National Foed and Nutrition Security Policy 
National Food Policy 
Non-Governmental Organisations 
National Innovation and Intellectual Property Rights Policy 
National Information Platform for Nutrition 
National Institute of Population Research and Training 
Nutrition Information and Planning Unit 
Second National Plan of Action for Nutrition 
National Nutrition Policy 
National Nutrition Services 
National Strategy on Prevention and Control of Micronutrient Deficiencies 
National Social Security Strategy 
Nutrition-Sensitive Value Chain 
Neglected and Underutilised Species 
Open Market Sales 
Operational Plans 
Palli Daridro Bimochon Foundation 
Public Food Distribution System 
Primary Health Care 
Palli Karma-Sshayak Foundation 
Pregnant and Lactating Women 
Prime Minister's Office 
Producers' Organizations 
Plan of Action 
Prevalence of Undernourishment 
Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021-2041 
Public Private Partnership 
Public Private Partnership Authority. 
Parts per million 
Persons with Disabilities 
Rural Development and Cooperatives Division 
Regional Technical Working Group 
Research and Development 
Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank 
South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation 
Small Business Agency 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
Special Data Dissemination Standards 
Sustainable Development Gaal 
Special Economic Zones 
SAARC Food Bank 
School Feeding Programme 
Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
State of Food Insecurity in the World 
Standard Operating Procedures 
Strategic Plan of Agriculture and Rural Statistics 
Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization 
Soil Resource Development Institute 
Ca

ST Short-Term 
SUN Scaling Up Nutrition 
SVRS Sample Vital Registration System 
TFA Trade Facilitation Agreement 
TR Test Relief 
TRIPS Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
TT Thematic Team 
TVET Technical and Vocations! Education and Training 
UNCC Upazila Nutrition Coordination Committee 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNESCAP - United Nations Economie and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund 
UNO Upazila Nirbahi Officer 
USAID United States Agency for Intemational Development 
USD US Dollar 
VGD Vulnerable Group Development 
VGF Vulnerable Group Feeding 
VWB Vulnerable Women's Benefit 
WASA Water Supply and Sewerage Authority 
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WEM Work for Money 
WEP World Food Programme 
WHO World Health Organization 
WwTo World Trade Organization 
7FYP Seventh Five Year Plan 
8FYP Bighth Five Year Pian 
OFYP Ninth Five Year Plan 
SSS 4 7!

Executive Summary 
Recent achievements and emerging challenges in food and nutrition security 
In recent years, Bangladesh has achieved commendable results in improving the food and nutrition 
security (FNS) of its population. The growth rate of food production now exceeds that of population 
and self-sufficiency in rice production achieved in 1998-99, is sustained and stable, Remarkable 
progress in poverty reduction, supported by sustained economic growth has improved access to food 
and enabled Bangladesh to reach the lower middle-income country status in 2015, Largely due to 
nutrition-sensitive drivers within a wider enabling environment of agriculture and pro-poor economic 
growth, despite substantial fluctuations, the prevalence of undernourishment (PoU) declined -to 13% in 
2019-as did food insecurity as reflected by the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FTES). Child stunting 
which reflects chronic malnutrition, decreased by a third over the last 20 years (Table 1), This is 
attributed to strong associations between household assets, large gains in parental education, and child 
growth outcomes. Other factors likely to have influenced child nutrition include, improved access to 
health services, hygiene and sanitation, reduced fertility rates, longer birth intervals and pro poor 
multisectoral policies. 
Building on these remarkable declines, accelerated efforts through comprehensive nutrition sensitive 
policies can help to meet the national nutrition targets and pave the way for sustainable food systems. 
Table 1. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2 : Key indicators and targets 
 
TGs 2018/19 WP ests Rl Tae 
Child Stunting. 44% 28% 15.5% BDHS, SDG Tracker 
Bangladesh still faces daunting challenges to ensure the FNS of its population which is projected to 
reach over 186 million by 2030. Emerging trends - including those exacerbated by the COVID-19 
pandemic - comprise increasing income inequality, scarcity of agricultural labour, the adverse impact 
of climate change on food productivity, and barriers to accessing safe and nutritious food. Increasing 
incomes and urbanisation have led to some dietary diversification but the rate has remained slow. 
Around half of the population still consumes diets deficit in micronutrients, and only a third 
of young children have minimum acceptable diets, Reduction in child wasting which reflects acute 
malnutrition in children due to food insecurity arising from seasonal shortages and disasters, regional 
disparities, poor diet, hygiene and care practices, has shown uneven progress. Besides, the "multiple 
burden of malnutrition" is pointing to an increase in non-communicable diseases, which needs to be 
addressed on a priority basis, 
Against this backdrop, the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) is committed to achieve FNS for all, at 
all times, to ensure an active and healthy life. It has also pledged to the global Agenda 2030 for 
sustainable development that includes ending poverty (SDG-1), and eradicating hunger and food 
insecurity, and achieving improved nutrition (SDG-2), by 2030. 
Making the National Food and Nutrition Security Policy actionable 
In continuity with the previous FNS-related policies and investment plans, the National Food and 
Nutrition Security Policy (NFNSP) approved in August 2020, takes into account the increasing role 
tt

of the private sector in food production, processing and marketing, the importance of partnerships, 
multisectoral convergence, and the enabling role of policymakers, Incentives, legislations and 
regulations represent the main policy instruments to 
encourage welfare, food safety, healthy diets and Figurea. Guiding principles 
nutrition improvements and changes in the economic 
decisions of food value chain actors. - ie., farmers. 
processors, marketers and consumers, The NFNSP also a 
recognises the relevant direct role of the public sector in r 
areas such as procurement and management of public = RAG 
food stock for price stabilisation and social security, ec ery 
hygiene and sanitation, behaviour change communication, 
and in partnership with the private sector, 
on investment in agricultural infrastructure, | GT 
nutrient-dense product development, food Production 
fortification/biofortification, and on other specific oon 
initiatives of agncultural research and development. 
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy Plan of Action 2021-2030 (PoA) aims to make the 
NFNSP actionable, by translating the initiatives in the policy into timebound interventions coordinated 
by relevant GoB agencies. The ten-year PoA covers the Eighth and Ninth Five Year Plan periods and 
aligns to the GoB priority of achicving FNS-related SDGs and fulfilling televant national and 
international commitments by 2030. 
The PoA provides a framework to all responsible GoB agencies and FNS stakeholders to ensure 
effective implementation, coordination and monitoring of the policy, following a set of guiding 
principles (Figure a). 
Coordinated by the Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), Ministry of Food, and technically 
assisted by the Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project implemented by FAO with funding 
from USAID and the EU, the PoA formulation process began with a thorough review of the NFNSP 
initiatives proposed under each strategy, giving rise to 275 priority actions grouped under 64 Areas of 
 
lees 
 
Figure b. Goal and objectives of the NFNSP 
 
eyo tes toe 
Biren er tein gt eo tie ctl 
ise LlCp Tet eM Chere t brs mt ett vee eee 
By penne 1 i 
 
re Niet er) To improve FNS status to the Jevel 
Re roa atte eat US kee eles Ly 
ISLES le le EB ibeT melt isle) 
national apd intcruationul 
Postiivartareriat ie Bey mret bh L 
}~ ee toate ee 
To enhance the consumption 
seis are Trees Diss r mit Lhe Tire 
 
To strengthon cross-soctaral 
FSN governunce, coordination, 
capacity building and 
eiatvosy |iiree ito me tito as heme le) Les 
implementation 
To inereasit access to nutrition- tirvorsified iets for achieving 
sonaitive eocial protection and irieelile Misti basielie seul 
vee eM Cwa pol LE 
Piet mele alibet-la. la) ate lel er 
lace eer si eine 
es viii |

Intervention, across 17 Strategies, under the five objectives (Figure b) of the policy. Extensive 
consultations with close to 700 relevant stakeholders and partners at local and national level ensued, 
and the PoA was amended to reflect the recommendations made (Figure c). 
Costing and tracking of the PoA 
investments 
A new Country Investment Plan (CIP) will 
reveal the actual spending on each of the PoA 
objectives and strategies. Other costing 
exercises carried out for the relevant SDGs 
and other programmes and projects may 
contribute to estimate the spending planned 
and resource required for the PoA 
implementation. 
 
Figure c. PoA production process 
Pod drafiing 
*MUCH Technical Assistance Team (TAT) review NFNSP 
*MUCH TAT draft the PoA 
ne Cal a. 
*FPMU Peer review PaA over 5 consultations 
following the NFNSP objectives 
Regional Consultations 
"Regional consultations in the § divisions of Bangladesh 
with public and private sector, academia & civil society 
Ss keenest ehh 
TT Consultations 
* Consultations with the $ TT corresponding to cach 
NFENSP objeéctivé 
LCG Consultations 
peer ROT sR Grat est ilr is mu siitm els a! 
agericies & DPs 
National Consultation 
* Validation of the final PoA draft 
PoA Launch 
«Official endorsement 
a

x

1. Introduction 
The context 
This document is the Plan of Action (PoA) to implement the National Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy (NFNSP), which was approyed by the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) in August 2020, and 
aims to ensure that Bangladesh achieves its food and nutrition security related Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and fulfils the relevant national and international commitments by 2030. This is the first 
time the GoB has formulated an integrated food and nutrition security (FNS) policy. The PoA covers 
the 10-year period of the Eighth Year Plan (8F YP, July 2020 - June 2025) and Ninth Five Year Plan 
(9FYP, July 2025 - June 2030). 
The five objectives of the NFNSP are: 
1. Toensure availability of safe and nutritious food for healthy diets 
2. To improve access to safe and nutritious food at an affordable price 
3. To enhance the consumption and utilisation of healthy and diversified diets for achicving 
nutrition improvements 
4. To increase access to nutrition-sensitive social protection and safety nets across lifecycle with 
a focus on vulnerable groups and regions 
5. To strengthen cross-sectoral FNS governance, coordination, capacity building and partnership 
for effective policy implementation 
The main precursors of the NFNSP are the National Food Policy 2006 (NFP) and the National Nutrition 
Policy 2015 (NNP). Since the NFP 2006, the policy context has changed considerably, with the 
development agenda shifting from the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) to the SDGs. Though 
Bangladesh achieved its nutrition related MDGs with regard to underweight reduction, wider targets 
were set under the SDGs that require scaling up and accelerating both nutrition-specific and nutrition- 
sensitive interventions to impact diets and nutrition, The fact for example, that a third of children were 
still chronically undernourished with serious negative implications for their long-term health and 
nutrition. There has been a clear transition from food security to FNS, 
Bangladesh has made substantial improvements in the food security and nutritional status of its 
population, At present, the growth rate of food production exceeds that of population. In terms of per 
capita calorie availability, self-sufficiency achieved in the food grain production of Bangladesh in the 
financial year 1998-99 is now sustained and stable. Rising per capita incomes and declining incidence 
of poverty indicate that access to food has also improved over time, Rapid economic growth, access to 
health care, parental education, and improyed hygiene and sanitation services have enabled Bangladesh 
to reach the lower middle-income country status in 2015. In addition, the prevalence of 
undernourishment (PoU) or "hunger" has declined from 20.8% in 1999-2001 to 13% in 2017-2019. 
Similarly, among under five years of age children, the rate of stunting was 51%, and underweight 43% 
in 2004, which has been reduced to 28% and 23%, respectively, in 2019. These indicate the country's 
recent commendable progress in improving FNS. 
Despite these recent commendable achievements however, Bangladesh still faces daunting challenges 
for ensuring FNS of its current population of more than 160 million which is projected to reach over 
186 million by 2030. Emerging negative trends could exacerbate the current challenges to ending 
hunger, achieving food security and improved nutrition, and promoting sustainable agriculture. These 
include continuing population growth, increasing income inequality, scarcity of agricultural labour 
resulting from internal and international migration, adverse impact of climate change on food 
productivity and barriers to access to safe and nutritious food. The COVID-19 pandemic may also have 
set back some of the progress achieved so far, with long-term effects. The issue of food safety has also 
as | il

come to the fore due to the Increasing geographic separation of consumption and production centres as a 
result of urbanisation. Increasing incomes and urbanisation have led to some dictary diversification but the 
rate has been slow and cereals still account for more than 60% of the Dietary Energy Intake (DEI). Diets 
have remained largely unbalanced with diets of more than 50% of the population being inadequate with 
deficiencies of vitamin A, calcium, folic acid, zine and iron, Reduction in child wasting which reflects acute 
malnutrition in children and is due to food insecurity arising from seasonal shortages and disasters, regional 
disparities, poor hygiene and care practices, has shown uneven progress. Besides, the "multiple burden of 
malnutrition" can result in a high incidence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), if not addressed on a 
priority basis. 
Against this backdrop, the GoB is committed to achieving FNS for all citizens, at all times, to ensure 
an active and healthy life. It has also pledged to ending poverty (SDG-1), and eradicating hunger and 
food insecurity, and achieving improved nutrition (SDG-2), by 2030. In addition, it has subscribed to 
the objectives of the Second International Conference on Nutrition (ICN2) Framework for Action, 
Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement and the UN Decade of Action on Nutrition. 
The economy of Bangladesh is market-oriented with food production, processing and marketing being 
largely in the domain of the private sector. The new policy is based on this reality. Hence, incentives 
and regulations are viewed as the main policy instruments to indirectly encourage changes in the 
economic decisions of private sector agents such as farmers, processors, marketers and consumers. In 
addition to this, the policy recognises the potential direct role of the public sector in areas such as 
procurement and management of public food stock for price stabilisation and social security, and in 
partnership with the private sector on investment in agricultural infrastructure, product development, or 
on specific aspects of agricultural Research and Development (R&D). 
Guiding principles 
A nutrition-sensitive food systems approach 
In continuity with the Second Country Investment Plan for Nutrition-Sensitive Food Systems 2016-20 
(CIP2), the approach taken in the NFNSP is to consider the food system in its entirety. Such holistic 
approach is essential to expand opportunities to strengthen nutrition access, enhance the capabilities of 
individuals to make nutritionally balanced healthy dictary choices and ensure the sustainability of 
nutritional outcomes. The approach also facilitates the identification and prioritisation of multi-sectoral 
interventions for synergistic impact. The Policy and PoA promote the use of a "nutrition lens" to assess 
and prioritise various options for designing multi-sectoral inter-linked interyentions that are centred 
around shaping food systems for improving diets and nutritional outcomes. 
Policy consistency 
The government commitments and approach to FNS are reflected in the NFNSP which is consistent 
with all relevant policies that it builds upon and complements, The cross-sectoral nature of the policy 
dictates that the actions proposed be aligned to the contents of other relevant national policies and 
sectoral plan documents. Annex 1 lists the national policies, strategic and planning documents crass- 
referenced in the PoA. 
Consultative process 
The Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project implemented by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAQ), assisted the GoB's Food Planning and Monitoring Unit 
(FPMU) and Thematic Teams (TTs),in preparing the PoA, by drafting the document and facilitating the 
consultations. Similar to the NFNSP development process, the PoA is the outcome of multiple rounds 
of iterative and inclusive consultations with relevant ministries, departments,and agencies,and non- 
a

governmental stakeholders, which includes, academia, civil society organizations and the private 
sector, at national and subnational lJevels' (Figure 1). Around 700 individuals participated in these 
consultations. Annex 2 and Annex 3 provide the detail of comments made during the regional, and 
other stakeholder consultations. Great care has been taken to fill in any gaps that these comments 
will have helped to identify. This dialogue between stakeholders will continue throughout 
the life of the PoA,making it a dynamic living document. Adjustments and improvements will 
be made based on results of monitoring activities, experience gained, and feedback received from 
national and international stakeholders. Appropriate adjustments will also be made in response to any 
major strategic reorientation of priorities and plans that may be reflected in the 9F YP. 
Figure 1. PoA formulation and consultations 
a: consultations | 4 virtual regional Thomatic Toom Presontation to National 
Pod drafted with FPMU foe consultations and & stahoholder the LOG for consultation 
peer review covering the & consultation at Agriculture, Food 
Divisions the national level Security and 
Rural 
Development 
Sustainability 
Sustainability lies at the heart of the SDGs and is therefore a recurrent consideration throughout the 
PoA. Sustainable food systems deliver "food security and nutrition for all in such a way that the 
economic, social and environmental bases to generate food security and nutrition for future generations 
are not compromised. This means that it is profitable throughout (economic sustainability), that it has 
broad-based benefits for society (social sustainability) and that it has a positive or neutral impact on the 
natural environment (environmental sustainability),"* The five principles of sustainability proposed by 
FAO have been integrated to the actions proposed in this document whenever relevant, namely: increase 
productivity, employment and value addition in food system; protect and enhance natural resources; 
improve livelihoods and foster inclusive economic growth; enhance the resilience of people, 
communities and ecosystems; and adapt governance to new challenges. 
Focus on women 
In order to achieve the goal of the NFNSP, the fact that women and men often have different, if comple- 
mentary, roles to play needs to be acknowledged and due attention given to the role of women. In 
Bangladesh, women exceed 50% of the agricultural labour force and they are mostly responsible for 
producing food on homestead premises. Through their reproductive work, they also influence nutrition 
of household members and they are responsible for the processing and food preparation as well as the 
hygiene and health of the family. Their own health and nutritional status have an intergenerational impact 
on nutrition in that it affects that of the babies they bear. Empowering women is key to tackling malnutn- 
tion through the many roles that they hold. For example, control over land and access to inputs and 
services such as credit, irrigation, rural advisory and extension services needs to be guaranteed and 
targeted to their needs. Easy access to safe food and water needs to be ensured, as well as access to 
health services especially for women of reproductive age, pregnant and lactating women (PLW). 
Information on and sensitisation to adequate nutrition is also key. The PoA has incorporated these 
considerations throughout the actions proposed under each strategy. 
 
' The consultation process had to be adapted to the unusual COVID-19 pandemic conditions and these took place virtually. 
* FAO. 2018. Sustainable food systems - Concept and framework 
es 3 |

Process 
The purpose of the PoA is to translate the policy into a time-bound results-oriented set of priority actions 
that operationalise the five NFNSP objectives. It provides a guiding framework in key aspects of 
implementation, coordination, and monitoring by all responsible ministries, agencies, and other 
stakeholders. The PoA formulation process began with a thorough review of NFNSP initiatives 
proposed under each strategy in order to articulate 275 priority actions grouped under 64 Areas of 
Intervention (Aol) across the five objectives and 17 Strategies of the Policy (see Figure 2). Annex 4 
lists the Aols by NFNSP Strategy and Objective. 
Figure 2. Logical structure of the PoA 
275 priority actions 
 | 64 PoA areas of intervention : 
L. 17 NFNSP strategies 
L. 5 NFNSP objectives 
| NFNSP ery 
 
Description of the Aols 
Chapter 2 to 6 of this PoA describes the 64 Aols proposed. Each defines an "action agenda" consisting of 
several complementary sets of activities that contribute towards attaining cach Strategy and Objective. 
In addition to a rationale (why is this Aol needed?) and action agenda (what will be done?), each Aol 
contains a section listing the cross references made to other documents, as well as to other Aols. The 
latter reflects the cross-sectoral nature of many of the issues covered in this policy. The review of these 
documents also identified opportunities for generating synergies among cross-sectoral programs along 
with actions needed to improve planning, coordination, implementation, and monitoring of such 
programs. For proper identification of Aols included in NFNSP, a three-digit numerical system has 
been used, The first digit refers to the objective, the second digit to the strategy and the third digit to 
the Aol: ¢.g., the identifier 2.3.1 refers to the first Aol of the third strategy of the second objective. 
Pian of Action implementation matrix 
The implementation matrices presented in Chapter 7 provides the basic framework for implementing, 
coordinating and monitoring of the NFNSP. Each Aol is linked with specific targets and performance 
indicators. Goal and outcome indicators are also proposed towards the monitoring of the NFNSP goal 
and five objectives. The matrix also provides the basic reference framework for planning and 
operationalizing monitoring activities. The actions proposed under each Aol are summarised and a time 
frame provided. Six components are included in each Aol matrix (see Figure 3); 
e Actions and activities: These are the actions and associated activities proposed to meet the 
objective of NFNSP strategies. Cross references are made when activities are consistent with 
other policy and planning documents or when they contribute to or overlap with other Aols.

Time Frame: This indicates the start of the activity and the implementation period, The PoA 
covers the period 2021-2030, Short-term (ST) refers to the immediate years (2021-2025), 
medium-term (MT) roughly to the second half of the 8FYP (2023-2025) and long-term (LT) 
roughly to the 9F YP (2025-2030). Action agenda/targets may be modified, or adjusted overtime 
based on the progress and/or changes in government policy priorities. For an activity starting 
and being completed within the same time period, only that one time period is shown. These 
time frames are indicative only and may have to be adapted as activities unfold. 
Targets: When relevant, available targets from pre-existing documents have been used (e.g., 
the Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021-2041 (PP2041) or the Second National Plan of Action 
for Nutrition 2016-2025 (NPAN2)). 
Indicators: This is needed to monitor progress over time against the set targets. The indicators 
need to be Specific, Measurable, Achicvable, Relevant and Time-bound (SMART). When 
appropriate, indicators used in the monitoring of other government plans and programs have 
been used. This guarantees that these indicators exist and will ease the monitoring process: In 
some cases, indicators for which the information is not currently available have been suggested 
because it seems important that the government starts doing so. 
Means of verification: These typically are government reports, field surveys, censuses, or other 
means of obtaining the indicators' data. 
Responsible actor and stakeholders: These are the government agencies responsible for 
implementing any particular Aol (in bold in the matrices),followed by all the stakeholders 
involved in achieving the target. 
Figure 3. Structure of the PoA implementation matrices 
Pevensey) Pate Pay Lt Cot.) 'Time frame pirate Indicators Means of Responsible actors 
iifervention Teepe ler LEtsie Mantel Peel eet yt el a 
OBJECTIVE | 
a | 
 
 
Costing and tracking of the PoA Investments 
A new Country Investment Plan (CIP) will reveal the actual spending on each of the objectives and 
strategies of the PoA as well as the spending planned. Resource requirements for implementing the PoA 
may partly be assessed from other costing exercises carried out for relevant SDGs and other relevant 
programmes and projects.

2. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 1 of the PoA 
Objective 1: To ensure the availability of safe and nutritious food for healthy diets 
 
Aol 1.1.1. Develop improved climate-smart technologies for productivity gains, agricultural 
diversification, sustainable intensification, and enhancement of nutrient-content 
Rationale 
Improved technologies not only increase the overall food availability but also drive the process of 
diversification towards the production of nutrient-dense foods by releasing scarce resources such as 
land and labour. The development and spread of high-yielding varieties need to be accelerated, 
especially for nutrient-dense crops such as pulses, nuts and oilseeds that are experiencing a decrease in 
production'. By raising the input-use efficiency, improved technologies also promote sustainable 
intensification as production gains can be achieved by optimizing the timely use of inputs to avoid 
wastage, water contamination, adverse impact on human health and environmental degradation. 
Improved technology includes mechanization which it reduces the cost of production in the face of 
increasing scarcity of farm labour and promotes crop intensification by facilitating timely farming 
operations such land preparation, planting, and harvesting. Bangladesh is one of the most mechanized 
agricultural economies in South Asia' mainly through fast expansion of power tillers and groundwater 
pumps but operations such as planting, weeding, and harvesting are still done manually. Under the 
National Agriculture Mechanization Policy 2019, farmers will be able to buy machinery at low-cost 
credit or even through interest-free loans and machinery sub-contracting for the block-based service 
provision, Climate-smart technologies are needed to reduce production losses likely to result from high 
frequency of extreme weather patterns induced by climate change, and to facilitate production in coastal 
and newly developed lands. Improved technologies are needed to increase the availability of 
micronutrient-dense fruits and vegetables, improved breeds of livestock, poultry, and fish that are high 
in good quality protein and bioavailable micronutrients, The micronutrient content of crops can also be 
increased by technologies such as biofortification. Substantial progress has been made in developing 
rice varieties that are rich in iron, zinc and vitamin A. More bio-fortified crops need to be developed. 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution that Bangladesh is witnessing, holds much promise including for small 
farmers, even if much work is needed to develop the skills required to avail of these new technologies. 
Action Agenda 
 
1, Develop stress-tolerant high-yielding varieties of major cereals and nutrient-dense crops 
such as pulses, oilseeds, soybeans, fruits and vegetables (in line with the National Agriculture 
Policy Plan of Action (NAP PoA) 2020 Programme 1.1, and 3.2) 
As the apex of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) which is composed of 10 research 
institutes, the Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council (BARC) is responsible for strengthening the 
national agricultural research capability. These organizations have developed research collaborations 
with several international agricultural research centres, agricultural universities in Bangladesh, and with 
various local research entities, The PoA will support and leverage the work of these research institutes. 
The particular emphasis will be on the development of stress-tolerant rice varieties suited to coastal 
saline areas, drought-prone north-west region, and submergence-prone low-lying southern delta region. 
 
' Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2020. Monitoring Report of the Second Country Investment Plan on Food and 
Nutrition Security 2020. Ministry of Food: Government of Bangladesh 
* World Bank. 2020. Promoting agri-food sector transformation in Bangladesh: policy and investment priorities 
bs

Several improved rice varieties with these characteristics have been developed and disseminated but 
this cffort needs to be further reinforced to increase the number of varieties suited to diverse farming 
conditions of Bangladesh'. Similarly, improved maize and wheat varieties are being developed by the 
Bangladesh Wheat and Maize Research Institute (BWMRI) in collaboration with the International 
Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT). In addition, the Bangladesh Agricultural Research 
Institute (BARI) is also developing improved varieties of various legume and pulses that are nutrient- 
rich, in collaboration with the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
(ICRISAT), as weil as orange fleshed sweet potato (Komola sundari) which is a rich source of Vitamin 
A. Research by private firms will also be encouraged (as suggested by the PP2041). 
 
2. Improve crop, soil and natural resources management practices including mechanization 
and "high tech" options to ensure high productivity and sustainability 
Similar to the development of improved varieties, the national research institutes are also developing 
crop, water, soil and natural resource management options adapted to different agro-ecologies of 
Bangladesh. Examples of these improved technologies include the alternate wetting and drying method 
for irrigation, fertiliser application based on soil tests, balanced use of organic and inorganic fertilisers, 
integrated pest management approach to reduce pesticide application, improved methods of weed 
control, conservation tillage, sorjan farming® and mechanization options to overcome labour shortage 
during periods of peak labour demand such as transplanting and harvesting of rice. Opportunities to 
increase the efficiency of input use through "high-tech" approaches will be exploited. Investments will 
be made towards the development of agricultural machinery that is resource and energy efficient, along 
with the training of farmers, Efforts will be made to customise equipment to the specific needs of 
Bangladeshi farmers (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Programme 2.2.1). 
 
 3. Develop improved breeds of livestock and fish and improved husbandry practices 
The livestock sector is the main source of high quality protein in the form of meat, milk and eggs. 
However, the productivity of livestock in Bangladesh in terms of meat and milk production is extremely 
low due to their origin from a poor genetic base. In addition, the lack of proper veterinary services and 
poor quality feed keep their productivity low. So, opportunities exist to increase the productivity of 
livestock sector through the application of science-led modern methods of breed improvement 
complemented by the delivery of effective veterinary services, and improved feeding and management 
systems. Loca! adapted breeds of livestock could be developed into high-yielding breeds through 
suitable breeding approaches. Issues of illegal livestock germplasm need to be addressed. The PoA will 
support and leverage the Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute's (BLRI) research with particular 
emphasis on using science-based methods for breed improvement, development of effective veterinary 
services, feed quality assurance and improvement in feeding practices. A gene bank will be developed 
for indigenous fish to be conserved and multiplied. 
 
 4. Deyelop biofortification to increase the nutrient-density of major food items 
Modern breeding and selection methods permit biofortification through which the bioavailability and 
the concentration of nutrients in crops can be increased. In contrast to industrial fortification, 
biofortification genetically adds selected nutrients in crops. Examples are, iron-rich rice, zinc-enriched 
rice and golden rice (with vitamin A), and orange fleshed sweet potato with high vitamin A content, 
The Bangladesh Rice Research Institute (BRRJ) and its partners are working to develop such rice and 
other crop varieties which are evaluated, piloted and taken to the field. Some of these varieties are 
already in the seed pipeline. The PoA will support and leverage BRRI's work to make such varieties 
readily available to farmers. 
 
3 Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU),2020. Op. cit 
® Sorjan farming method combines vegetable crops with fish farms and makes land that is waterlogged during the miny season 
but faces drought and salinity in the dry season become productive. 
es 7 i!

Cross references 
e NAP PoA 2020: Program 1.1: Sustainable production of safe and nutritious food; 
1.2: Sustainability of production systems and management of natural resources; 1.3: 
Management of impact of climate change for sustainable agricultural production; 2.2. 
Appropriate Scale Mechanization and Usage of Clean Renewable Energy in Farm Operations; 
3.2 Agricultural research 
e PP2041 
Aol 1,1.2. Disseminate improved technologies and practices at farmer and farm level through 
effective and participatory extension services 
Rationale 
Extension and advisory services (EAS) are crucial for transferring the technologies and skills to 
diversify agriculture, raise agricultural productivity, strengthen food safety, promote climate change 
adaptation, and boost value addition and rural incomes, especially in lagging regions. While Bangladesh 
boasts one of the largest networks of extension frontline personnel who provide training, technologies 
and services up to the upazila levels, the EAS system is not as effective as needed despite continuing 
reforms. EAS are provided by a wide range of public, private and civil society actors, but are still 
woefully stretched. In 2018/19, the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), the largest actor, 
trained 1.8 million farmers on sustainable agriculture.' A typical field-level official in DAE is 
responsible for 900-2,000 agricultural households, and in the Department of Fisheries (DoF) or the 
Department of Livestock Services (DLS), 60,000-70,000 agricultural households share two to three 
officers.*'. The NAP PoA 2020 aims to devise an efficient extension system for fast and effective 
transfer of technology through its Programme 1.5. Recognising the range of actors, the 2012 National 
Agriculture Extension Policy emphasizes stronger partnerships, coordination and quality to optimize 
resources. Consistent to this, aspects of the 2013 National Livestock Extension Policy aims to 
strengthen research-extension-farmers linkages; mobilise producer organizations to access 
technologies, information and marketing; and harmonize public and private services. EAS are mostly 
supply-led, with institutional bottlenecks in the research-extension-farmer linkage, and little 
accountability. Increased spending based on "value-for-money", stronger governance and 
accountability, and better approaches to EAS are needed. Participatory approaches that ensure the 
research that is produced is needed and used, will lead to greater incomes and demand, thereby creating 
the required virtuous cycle: More intensified and widespread efforts are needed on inclusion of 
vulnerable groups, nutrition and climate adaptation. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Strengthen capacities of extension workers to better meet priorities (see Aol 4.2.1 on 
disaster resilient agriculture, and especially its Action | on taking a "hotspot" approach) 
This action will ensure that the Government's service can be more relevant to current priorities and 
needs of different regions. EAS needs will be mapped (8FYP objective) based on agro-ecological 
niches, prevailing productivity gap and regional specificity, and relevant knowledge will be drawn 
through closer links with public agricultural research institutions and universities, Delivery of this 
knowledge will need strengthened development and training of human resources in extension agencies 
to ensure that the content of the service is consistent with the mapping and is technologically updated. 
The issues of focus will be consistent with priorities in the 8FYP and the NAP to promote: sustainable 
farming practices and diversification on the basis of crop zoning and value addition; appropriate 
mechanisation; water saving technology and surface water irrigation; boro rice cultivation in southern 
 
7 Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2020. Op. cit 
* Huber S. with K. Davis .2017, Bangladesh: Desk Study of Extension and Advisory Services. USAID 
*® Other public providers of extension services are Agricultural Information Service, Department of Agricultural Marketing, 
Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation.

Bangladesh; salt-tolerant varictics in coastal districts; high value crops in the Barind tracts and hill 
districts; nutrition-sensitiye agriculture; climate-smart agriculture; promotion of Neglected and 
Underutilised Species (NUS); and use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in 
extension services. Given the shortage of personnel, all district and upazila extension workers should 
be trained in multidisciplinary skills across livestock, fisheries, and crops EAS.'' Efforts to promote 
nutrition-sensitivity will continue in capacity strengthening with EAS training including nutrition 
education and diversification of homestead production.'' Targeting NUS can play a vital role in 
nutrition (cross-reference to Aol 1.2.1), and in soil health in some places. The upscaling of 
mechanisation using power tillers, tractors and threshers in recent years has relied on farmers accessing 
relevant EAS, and this will be intensified. 
 
2. Increase inclusion of poor farmers, women and youth in extension services (this links to 
Aol 4.3.4 on "productive social protection"') 
This action will ensure that extension services reach out to and are designed to meet the needs of poor 
farmers, women and youth. Accountability weaknesses mean there is a tendency to provide more 
services to the richer, large-scale farmers, who are often better connected. The 2012 National 
Agriculture Extension Policy emphasises the inclusion of poor farmers and women in extension 
services. The classification of farmers by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)" could be 
useful to design distinct EAS for differentiated needs. Despite reforms, mainstreaming gender in EAS 
remains weak and women agriculturalists are under-served.'* In addition, given Bangladesh's 
demographics in the coming decade, this action will enhance the inclusion of young people in extension 
services to support the Government's efforts on rural transformation, such as amar bari, amar khamar 
(My house, My Farm) and My Village, My Town programmes. Since poor farmers, women and youth 
tend to have limited access to land, extension services related to non-land based agricultural activities 
will be prioritised and improved. An additional way to promote greater inclusion of women in 
agriculture is for more women to provide EAS, but this will need greater attention and support for the 
specific mobility, access and other gendered needs of women as EAS providers. '* 
 
3. Strengthen demand-led extension services 
This action will promote demand-led, decentralized and local-level planning of extension services to 
address from the bottom-up institutional bottlenecks in the farmers-extension-research linkage (as 
emphasised in the 8F YP). The purpose is for EAS to better meet needs with the right knowledge in the 
right place at the right time. The action will better mainstream participatory extension approaches 
focused on farmers' needs, and lmked to holistic sustainable farming systems approaches, to iteratively 
strengthen the farmers-extension-research linkage. The Agricultural Extension Manual outlines 
practical steps for demand-led and participatory-led extension services, and these need to be 
implemented better, as well as the strategies in the manual to meet region specific needs in haor, 
chars, hill tracts, Barind, and coastal regions. This will need effective coordination between research 
and extension to transfer new technologies to farmers, private sector entrepreneurs and Non- 
Governmental Organisations (NGOs). The Agricultural Technical Committees, each covering 2-6 
districts in similar agro-ecological zones, will be strengthened. 
4. Strengthen public-private-NGO partnerships 
 
 
This action will develop public-private-NGO partnerships to scale-up extension services, meet diverse 
extension needs and promote commercialisation of agriculture. The partnerships will focus on greater 
coordination, mutual support between actors, quality control of services and consistency of services 
 
'° Zahurul, K., Md, Abu Bakar & Md. Nazrul Islam, 2009. Study of the Implementation Status and Effectiveness of New 
Agricultural Extension Policy for Technology Adoption. FPMU and FAO 
'! Kachelriess-Matthess, S., A. Matthess, A. Stancher, B. Asare, & E.O, Afoakwa. 2016, Promoting Nutrition-sensitive 
Extension Advisory Services. Note 25. GFRAS Good Practice Notes for Extension and Advisory Services, Lausanne, 
Switzerland 
'2 Anderson J., Moler A. & Kretchun N. 2016. National Survey and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Bangladesh 
- Understanding their Demand for Financial, Agricultural and Digital Solutions CGAP Working Paper December 2016 
'* Momun-ur-Rashid, M., M. Kamruzzaman & E. Mustafa. 2017. Women Participation in Agricultural Extension Services in 
Bangladesh. Bangladesh. Journal of Extension Education V29 N1 
'* World Bank. 2019. Bangladesh Climuate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plan, World Bank, Washington DC 
as i!

across places, following the outline in the Agricultural Extension Manual. Some private retailers and 
agro-processors provide extension services within wider support in "contract farming" systems 
designed to ensure an adequate supply and quality of produce as required by these companies.'* 
Motivated by market incentives, this kind of extension service does not need government support, and 
the partnerships will aim to ensure that the advice given is consistent with government objectives, such 
as on sustainability, water management, and social inclusion. In addition, extension and advisory 
services are provided by other private and NGO actors involved at different specific points in the supply 
chain, and the government will form partnerships that will emphasise training so that services can be of 
higher quality and delivered more effectively to farmers.'* The Bangladesh Extension Network (BAEN) 
was formed in September 2014 as a platform for extension actors to promote coordination, and could 
be involved in this action. The district and upazila Agricultural Extension Planning Committees should 
provide stronger coordination across actors, as well as across crops and non-crops. 
 
 5, Enhance the use of ICT 
This action will expand the use of ICT for e-agriculture and continue to establish Farmer's Information 
and Advisory Centre (FLAC), aiming for full coverage of all unions. This will strengthen the extension- 
farmers' information linkage. Also, audio-visual mass media will continue to be used for lower cost 
communication to communities with lower literacy, and the design of these will need to be sensitive to 
inclusion of poor farmers, women, and youth, with links to Action 2 of this Aol. To strengthen the 
research-extension linkage, the action will increase the use of management and information systems 
(MIS) and ICT-based knowledge management system in service delivery. The National Agricultural 
Extension Policy 2012 highlights the use of ICT for establishing digitised databases and MIS down to 
the upazila level. The challenge will be to not only increase the availability of ICT systems, which has 
been ongoing, but also to ensure they are used for service improvement, e.g., climate services, which 
links to Action 1 of this Aol on capacity strengthening. Many project-based initiatives and pilots have 
been undertaken, and the key now is scaling up what works, and ensuring sustainability since the 
technology and content needs continual updating. Private sector with experience in this area, such as 
the Bangladesh Institute of ICT in Development, should play a role.'' 
 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 1.2.1.; 4.2.1.; 4.3.4. 
* National Livestock Extension Policy 2013 
e National Agricultural Extension Policy 2012 
e NAP PoA 2020: Programme 1.5 Efficient extension system for fast and effective transfer of 
technology 
e DAE Strategic Plan 2002-2006 
¢ Agricultural Extension Manual 2018 
e 8FYP 2020-2025 
 
'S Wadud, F., S.C. Babu & S.1, Afrad. 2015. Private Provision of Extension Through the Contract Farming Approach in 
Bangladesh: The Case of PRAN. In: Knowledge Driven Development (cditors Y. Zhou and S.C. Babu), Syngenta Foundation 
for Sustainable Agriculture, Basel, Switzerland 
© USAID, 2017, Public and Private Extension Agents in USAID Agricultural Extension Support Activity Project. USAID. 
Bangladesh 
'? Malone, P., S,U. Akbar, M. Bell & A_B, Bohn. 2013. Report on the Status of ICT for Agricultural Extension in Bangladesh. 
USAID. Bangladesh

Aol 1.1.3. Expand and promote the use of water-efficient and environmentally friendly 
alternative irrigation technologies, including surface irrigation 
Rationale 
Water scarcity is becoming one of the main constraints to agriculture in Bangladesh. Consumption is 
increasing with the rise in population and industrial development. Concurrently, water availability is 
declining: the groundwater table has been dropping up to three metres per year in some areas of the 
country, and sometimes beyond the suction limit during the dry season. As the lowest riparian country 
in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin, Bangladesh is largely dependent on other countries for its 
surface water. In Southern districts, groundwater is affected by salinity, limiting its use for agriculture 
and drinking purposes" (sce Aol 4.2.1). Large infrastructure projects taking place in India, dams in 
particular, are also set to worsen the problem of water availability by decreasing river volumes. In spite 
of the National Water Policy 1999 and the Water Act 2013 emphasising the sustainability of water 
delivery through "appropriate legal and financial measures and incentives, including delineation of 
water rights and water pricing", this has still not been achieved. These challenges are being exacerbated 
by climate change. Water scarcity affects poorer farmers more as their limited resources restrict them 
to irrigating the staple crop, rice. This not only prevents them from cultivating more remunerative crops 
but it also affects the diversity in the country's agricultural production. Across the board, inadequate 
irrigation can hinder diversification with impact on FNS.'° The current context means that water usage 
needs to become more efficient, groundwater economised, and surface irrigation used less wastefully. 
Novel approaches therefore need to be developed, rules and prices reviewed to reflect water scarcity 
and water-efficient technologies disseminated. The World Bank's Climate-Smart Agriculture 
Investment Plan (CSAIP) estimates that with adequate climate-smart measures, water use may be 
reduced by 40% by 2040 compared to business as usual. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Increase surface water usage, enhance water conservation and increase water use efficiency 
(in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Area of Intervention 1.2.2) 
Surface water irrigation will be encouraged and rainwater harvested, Rainwater is free from arsenic 
contamination and salinity. While rainwater harvesting is mostly adapted to drinking, it can serve for 
irrigation for homestead gardens and in cases of drought. It can also be integrated with hydroponic 
cultivation instead of irrigation as suggested by the World Bank's CSAIP for Bangladesh. Construction 
of new reservoirs and repair of old ones for conservation of rainwater thus needs to be expanded 
throughout the country and suitable storage developed. Forests should be protected, and tree planting 
encouraged for their role in balancing the discharge and recharge of water tables. Irrigation methods 
that consume less water will continue to be disseminated, Alternate wetting and drying for example not 
only reduces water use but also limits methane emissions. Using buried pipes rather than using open 
channels minimises evaporation and spills. More focus should be put on rainfed aus and aman rather 
than irrigation intensive bore rice which accounts for almost 90% of the Consumptive Water Use. In 
water scarce areas, sprinklers, drips and micro-irrigation should be promoted, Different areas may 
warrant different approaches such as portable irngation for vegetables in the char areas (see NAP PoA 
2020 Key Aol 1.4.4). Reuse of wastewater, especially in peri-urban areas will be seriously looked into 
 
' Ministry of Environment and Forests. 2017. Bangladesh Country Investment Plan for Environment, Forestry and Climate 
Change (2016 - 2021). Government of Bangladesh 
Rahman, 5. & Kazal, M.M.H. 2015. Determinants of crop diversity in the regions of Bangladesh (1990-2008). Singapore 
Journal of Tropical Geography. 36: 83-97,

with the necessary adjustments to existing rules and regulations made in order to upkeep safety 
standards and infrastructure investments made.*" 
2. Develop and promote new technologies and infrastructure 
 
 
R&D will continue in collaboration with the private sector to develop new sustainable and energy 
efficient irrigation technologies learmng from other countries' experience. For example, precision 
irrigation is being developed using sensors that guide the growers as to the exact irrigation needs of 
different crops. Innovative technologies will be disseminated. [CT-based and digital solutions for 
irrigation water management will contribute to achieving sustainable water availability for irrigation 
in the coming decades (PP2041), Concurrently, large infrastructure projects required to ensure 
country-wide irrigation will continue, including those that upgrade and modemise existing systems. 
Rubber dams will be built and restored to prevent saltwater intrusion as well as sluice gates to control 
flood waters. Excavation and re-excavation of canals and rivers have proved to provide good job 
opportunities for women and reclaimed khas land from irrigation projects has been distributed to 
destitute women, an initiative which should continue*', Involvement of the private sector will be 
sought; the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (BDP 2100) projects that on an average Bangladesh should 
be able to mobilize at least 0.5% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per year from private sector to 
finance projects of water resource management and related infrastructure, This is important for costly 
endeavours such as dredging which are not only needed to maintain river navigability and control 
flows but also for properly functioning irrigation systems. 
 
 3. Facilitate access to sustainable irrigation technology 
Access to irrigation technology adapted to all size farms and geographies will be promoted by exposing 
producers to demonstrations, giving them access to finance for necessary investments (in line with Aol 
1.1.4), and promoting the formation of groups and cooperatives (in line with Aol 1.1.9) which 
collectively, can secure better access to infrastructure and ensure its effective maintenance and 
management (PP2041). Particular attention will be given to increasing rural women's access and 
participation in irrigation schemes and water management initiatives which are proved to be 
determinants of improved household livelihood, nutrition and health' (as per CIP2 Programme I.2). 
Access to clean and sustainable technologies will be favoured, such as, the promotion of solar 
powered irrigation pumps (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 2.2.2). 
 
 . Adjust incentives to promote clean, efficient and sustainable irrigation 
See Aol 1.1.5 Activity 2. 
 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1,4.; 1.1.9. 
*« NAP PoA 2020: Key Aol 1.2.2. Enhancing Water Conservation & Productivity; 1.4.4. 
Agriculture in Special Areas; 2.2.2. Clean and Renewable Energy in farm operations and 
domestic needs of power 
* Bangladesh CIP for Environment, Forestry and Climate Change (2016 - 2021), Government of 
Bangladesh 
PP2041 
BDP 2100 
Bangladesh National Conservation Strategy 2016 
National Water Policy 1999 
 
*" Haldar. K., K.Kujawa-Roeleveld, M. Schoenmakers, D.K_ Datta, H.Rijnaarts & J, Vos. 2021. Institutional challenges and 
stakeholder perception towards planned water reuse in peri-urban agriculture of the Bengal delta. Journal of Environmental 
Management Vol 283 
*! Ministry of Finance. 2019. Medium-Term-Budget-Framework- Ministry of Water Resources 2019/20. Government of 
Bangladesh 
» Bryan, E. & El Didi, H. 2019 Guest Commentary - Considering Gender in Irrigation; Technology Adoption for Women 
Farmers. Chicago Council on Global Affairs

Aol 1.1.4. [Improve timely access to credit, including micro-credit, to small-scale producers 
through suitable institutional reforms 
Rationale 
To address the adverse effect of climate change and the SDGs fulfillment, inclusive agricultural finance 
is essential. Timely increased access to credit is essential to ensure that small-scale producers have the 
liquidity to both timely operate, and take up the risk of changing their current practices in favor of 
adopting climate smart tecnology and diversification. Credit disbursement is uneven across the country; 
farmers in the char, haor and less developed areas had less than 1% of the total beneficiaries and 
the amount of disbursement. Crop sector agricultural credit receives 60% of the total disbursement, and 
fisheries and livestock sector receive only 10% each, and the rest is by other rural activities. The average 
size of loans disbursed is small and barely meets farmers' needs. Many farmers who cannot borrow from 
the formal financial sector, borrow from microfinance institutions (MFIs) but face a number of 
challenges including high interest rates, credit overlapping, unfavourable repayment periods, and credit 
ceilings. Suitable institutional reforms are necessary for ensuring the availability and access to 
agricultural credit in an inclusive and timely manner. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Develop agricultural credit service in a timely manner for the poor, marginalized and small- 
scale producers through the formal banking system 
Bangladesh Bank (BB) along with its public and commercial banks are providing agricultural credit 
with over 10% growth rate in recent years to almost three million borrowers where 41% are women. 
However, the credit disbursement is often not done in a timely manner, resulting in underutilization of 
credit and economic losses. Timely disbursement of credit to the small-scale producers are crucial in 
this regard and actions need to be undertaken. A recent profiling by CGAP* defined the following 
smallholders farming groups: (i) farming for sustenance; (ii) battling the elements; (iii) option for 
growth; and (iv) strategic agriculture entrepreneurs (also see Aol 2.2.2), This profiling will be utilized 
to improve the targeting. The definition of farmer will also need to be reviewed to include farmers so 
far excluded such as those rearing livestock, honeybees, cultivating mushrooms etc., thus preventing 
them from availing credit from banks (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.6.1.2). 
 
 
2. Introduce Krishok Credit Card agent banking and mobile financial services for the agricultural 
sector (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.6.1.2). 
Introducing agent banking and mobile financial service (MF'S) may reduce the cost of providing formal 
credit to the beneficiarics. Bank accounts will be opened for all farmers and Krishok Credit Card 
distributed to all farmers. Special efforts will be made to ensure women have access too (as per NAP 
PoA 2020 2.4.4) This formal banking account may be used to take credit, deposit savings, maintain 
insurance payments and market agri-produce, Recently, Bangladesh Bank allowed the inter-bank 
service of MFS which will help agent banking to reach out to geographically hard-to-reach areas. 
However, the implementation of this mode of payment and bank account still needs to be expanded to 
include all farmers and in particular small-scale producers. 
 
3. Reduce interest rate of microcredit services and increase the grace period of loan repayment 
with commodity specific calendar 
The average loan size of agricultural loans by MFIs is often small with high interest payments. Besides, 
the loan repayment schedule is not often adapted to the crop calendar, Extending the grace period to 
take into account expected harvesting times should be promoted. The lower interest rate prescribed by 
the Central Bank (less than 9%) should be enforced. 
 
2} Anderson J., Moler A. and Krechten N. 2016. Op, cit, 
rs 13 ||

4. Carry out institutional reform in the service provision of agricultural credit, its terms and 
conditions, and mode of payment 
Institutional reform is crucial in the service provision of agricultural credit, its terms and conditions and 
mode of payment. Bangladesh Bank has suggested a number of changes for the provision of credit 
service which need to be implemented throughout its affiliated organizations. Agriculture and rural 
credit disbursement modalities and its credit programmes in agricultural sub-sectors, its interest rate 
and the use of modern technologies, credit repayment and monitoring, case of access to credit for poor 
and vulnerable people in adverse climatic situations, data generation and reporting, are the most 
important areas of intervention where institutional reform is necessary. Krishi banks across the country 
including other institutions providing credit such as, Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) or 
Palli Daridro Bimochon Foundation (PDBF), have their own institutional limitations for credit 
operations, Strengthening these institutions by undertaking reform and inter-connectivity is essential 
for the development of this sector. 
Cross references 
e NAP PoA 2020: Key Aol 1.6.1.2 Link scheduled banks for advancing timely credit with a 
Krishok Credit Card; 2.4.4 Multi-dimensional Role of Women in Agriculture and Gender 
Equity 
Aol 1.1.5. Improve input use efficiency for productivity gains, sustainability, and health and 
environmental protection 
Rationale 
Higher input-use efficiency is necessary not only to raise farmer incomes but also to promote sustainable 
intensification. Increased efficiency of inputs means that more inputs applied are used for productive 
purposes and less is wasted, Excessive use of chemical fertilisers, pesticides and irrigation is one of the 
major environmental concerns in the agriculture sector of Bangladesh. The application of these inputs 
at the right time and in right quantity based on scientific principles will increase the input use efficiency. 
Fertiliser use in Bangladesh has increased steadily over time, with the application being 289 kg/ha of 
arable land in 2016", substantially higher than the south Asia average of 160 kg/ha*®. An imbalance in 
the use of nitrogenous fertilisers relative to potassium and phosphorous is another reason for low 
efficiency. The low use efficiency of nitrogenous fertilisers in Bangladesh indicates that large 
proportions are lost to the atmosphere and to the groundwater with major negative health and 
environmental consequences. The scarcity of water for agricultural use has increased over time due to 
rapidly increasing demand for water from expanding urban and industrial sectors and the traditional 
practice of continuous irrigation in rice production. Improvements in water use efficiency in agriculture 
are thus needed both on economic and environmental grounds. Although the use of insecticides which 
account for a large share of the total pesticide use has decreased over time in Bangladesh', substantial 
adverse impact of toxic pesticides on human health and the environment remain, calling for expanding 
the use of integrated pest management practices. The lion's share of the total seed requirement is still 
provided by farmers, although homegrown seeds are typically of poor quality because knowledge about 
seed production technology, processing and storage is very limitedTM. Finally, inadequate rights overland 
and water hamper their sustainable and efficient use and also exclud certain sections of the population, 
 
* Bangladesh Bank. 2019. Agriculture and Rural Development Credit Policy and Program 2019-20 
* World Bank. 2020. Op. cit. 
* Thid. 
* Farag, A.N, 2018, Agnoulture and pesticide consumption in Bangladesh. Papor presented at Conference Effluent Contro! 
and Waste Management with Special Emphasis on Biopesticides. Bogor Indonesia. 
* Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2020. Op. cit. 
i)

Action Agenda 
1. Develop and disseminate of knowledge-intensive technologies and practices 
 
 
The case for increasing the overall agricultural R&D expenditure in Bangladesh is made in Aol 1.2.2. 
The history of allocation of R&D expenditure in South Asia indicates that the focus of R&D has been 
on breeding for crop improvements. This is also the case in Bangladesh. In the context of improving 
the input use efficiency, there is clearly a case for increasing the investments in crop and natural 
resources management research (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Programme 3.2.1). The scope of such 
research includes crop agronomy, soil, water and pest management. Improved knowledge-intensive 
management technologies suited to various crops and agro-ecological zones need to be developed. 
Currently available technologies include soil test-based application of fertilisers, the use of organic 
fertilisers, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), alternate wetting and drying method of irrigation. An 
online advisory system that can be accessed through mobile phones is also being developed by the Soil 
Resource Development Institute (SRDI)*'. These various options will be refined and expanded to cover 
various regions and cropping systems (in line with the NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.2.1. and 1.2.2), The 
use of bio-fertilisers and bio-pesticides will be similarly encouraged (in line with the NAP PoA 2020 
Key Aol 1.1.1). Efforts will continue to eradicate the sale of unregistered pesticides by bringing the 
country's pesticide management under a uniform system and by clarifying and implementing the laws 
on this matter. Emphasis will be given on developing quality seeds (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 
1.1.3) by strengthening capacities of Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture (BINA) and BRRI for 
example, and also training farmers on how to produce quality seeds and store them to preserve them. 
This should include seeds of regional and ethnic foods prioritised for their nutritional qualities (see Aol 
1.2.1). In addition, components of "high-tech" systems (as developed and disseminated under Aol 1.1.1. 
and 1.1.2) such as nano-technologies, mobile software-based monitoring and field-embedded 
monitoring sensors will be promoted for increasing both yield and quality of produce, The use of such 
technologies is currently not widespread for several reasons including the paucity of location-specific 
recommendations that are easily accessible to farmers, Modern ICT-based approaches including the use 
of cell phones can be instrumental in improving the access to information. Bangladesh is taking some 
important initiatives in this direction with attempts to mainstream ICTs throughout the agricultural 
value chain*', In addition, it is important to develop farmers' capacity to process location-specific 
information and adjust their management practices to suit the conditions. The traditional top-down 
extension system using a liner "transfer of technology" approach clearly needs to change towards 
providing information to farmers and empowering them to make better decisions through capacity 
building. The PoA will support and leverage the respective components of NAP PoA 2020 and the 
National Agricultural Extension Policy 2020. 
 
2. Carry out policy reforms to incentivise clean, efficient and sustainable technologies and 
practices at scale 
One of the key reasons for low efficiency of fertiliser use is substantial subsidies provided to fertilisers", 
Similarly, low marginal cost of irrigation in the prevailing water market has reduced the incentives to 
save water and use it more efficiently**. In line with the Bangladesh National Conservation Strategy 
2016, adequate regulatory frameworks are needed to adjust water and electricity pricing policies, thus 
providing appropriate incentives. While alternative wetting and drying has been promoted for over a 
decade, it has not reduced the use of irrigation water to the extent expected because of the lack of 
economic incentives: indeed, water pricing is based on per unit area irrigated rather than on the amount 
 
" Thid. 
% Tbid. 
| World Bank. 2020. Op. cit. and Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2020. Op. cit. 
* Pandey, S., S. Yadav. J, Hellin, J. Balié, H. Bhandari, A. Kumar & M.K. Mondal. 2020. Why Technologies Often Fail to 
Scale: Policy and Market Failures behind Limited Scaling of Alternate Wetting and Drying in Rice in Bangladesh. Water, vol. 
12, no. 5 
es 15 |!

of water used.*? Meanwhile, subsidies on power have kept the cost of irrigation low and this is likely 
to have prevented the price system from reflecting water scarcity. A gradual and rationalised reduction 
in the power subsidised could direct farmers towards a more efficient and sustainable use of this natural 
resource in irrigation.TM 
 
 3. Improve access to land and waterbodies and ensure their efficient use 
The digital land zoning of Bangladesh will continue, which will contribute to ensuring the most efficient 
use of land in the country given the competing demands. The land use policy should include availability 
of land for salt production. Efforts to establish land rights especially for the most vulnerable groups, 
with a special focus on women will also continue. The role of forests in maintaining the ecological base 
for food security and as a storehouse of uncultivated crop varieties that may be developed, will be 
acknowledged, and these resources protected. Jheels, common waterbodies and land need to be 
preserved and their access guaranteed, and social equity issues addressed, 
Cross references 
¢ NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.1; 1.1.2; 1.2.1; 1.2.2. 
¢ NAP PoA 2020: Key Aol Arca of Intervention 1.1.1. Productivity convergence for meeting 
current and future demand of nutritious foods; 1.1.3. Vibrant Seed Sector for Quality Seeds and 
Planting Materials; 1.2.1. Managing soil health; 1.2.2 Enhancing Water Conservation & 
Productivity; 1.2.1.6, Promote Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)/Integrated Plant 
Nutrition System (IPNS) approach of fertiliser application for better soil health and sustainable 
production; Programme 3.2 Modernizing and Reorienting Agricultural Research 
Aol 1.1.6. Promote the production of quality feed and fodder through appropriate support to feed 
and fodder industries for fisheries and livestock 
Rationale 
The growth of the fisheries and livestock sector, essential to respond to the dietary needs of the fast 
growing population, is constrained by the availability of affordable and safe feed and fodder, calling for 
urgent measures to promote the production of these inputs**. Low profit margins prevail in this sector 
because of high feed costs. A large proportion of the main ingredients needed to produce feed are 
imported. Increasing competing demands on land means there is little space left for fodder cultivation 
and pasture.*? Excessive monsoon flooding linked to climate change experienced in recent years also 
affects the production and storage of feed. Another constraint is that some of the crops used in modern 
animal feeds, particularly broiler chickens, are also consumed by humans thus setting up direct 
competition. Moreoyer, production and supply mismatches and seasonal availability of feeds and 
fodders affect animals" nutrition levels*'. The quality and safety of the feed and fodder is also an 
important issue to tackle in Bangladesh**. Adequate fish feed is also not available in required quantities 
and its safety is often dubious with for example, instances of heavy metal contamination, Antibiotics 
-are still found in poultry feed and used in shrimp farms to keep mortality low and growth high, although 
their use is banned in Bangladesh. Half of the feed mills operate without registration which makes 
 
a Pandey, 5., S. Yadav, J. Hellin, J, Baiié, H. Bhandari, A, Kumar & M.K, Mondal. 2020. Op, cit 
Lhid. 
* FAO. 2007. Economics of aquaculture feeding practices in selected Asian countries. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper $05 
Kamal, S.M. & T. Jashim .2019. Feed feeds Bangtadesh. January. Policy Research Institute of Bangladesh. Policy Insights. 
*? Sarker, N.R, S.M-R. Rahman & M.Y.A. Khan. 2019. Feeds & fodder production in Bangladesh; present tend, availability, 
future requirements and challenges dairying in 2030 International Conferenee on Dairy 
* Ovi, LH. & Hussain, A. 2019 Pork product detected in protein imported for use in fish and poultry feed. Dhaka Tribune. 10 
September

quality checks challenging. The Safe Food Act 2013/Codex Standards for healthy feeds ensuring the 
absence of contaminants in feeds for food-producing animals need to be adhered to. 
Action Agenda 
 
 1. Research and development 
R&D will be crucial to develop high yielding and resistant varieties of crops used as feeds such as maize 
and soybean (see Aol 1.1.1.), Helping to produce the raw materials used in feed will help Bangladesh 
becomes less reliant on imports and on fluctuations in international prices and changes in import and 
export policies. R&D will also help identify or further develop techniques of safe feed and fodder 
production at low cost and throughout the year thus minimising reliance on imports. This will include 
investigating the possibility and economic feasibility of using non-conventional feed resources and of 
recycling waste (see Aol 5.2.1). Hydroponics fodder production may also be investigated as a way to 
respond to fodder needs during the rainy season, as well as salinity-resistant fodder. Methods to 
maximise the use of available feed resources such as agricultural and agro-industrial by-products, 
natural pastures and browse will be sought. Supplementation strategies to complement nutritional 
content of feed at affordable prices will also need to be developed. Research should also focus on 
improving the feed resources that many smallholders often produce themselves. Fodder conservation 
practices should be developed to enable a stable supply of feed throughout the year. Low-cost 
aquaculture feeding techniques that can also help to reduce environmental impacts will also be further 
developed. 
 
2. Extension services 
Extension services will be key to promote the techniques developed through R&D. For example, 
farmers will be taught to maximise the use of available feed resources and complement poor quality 
natural pasture as required. Forage production will also be encouraged through means such as the 
integration of forage with crop cultivation, tree plantation, use of embankments, roadsides, Khas land, 
char areas, ctc. Maize production will be encouraged, especially quality protein maize, given its climate 
resilience, high yield and reduced need for water (especially compared to boro rice). The use of aquatic 
plants as feed will be encouraged and floating aquaponics for fodder production in Aaor and char areas 
disseminated. 
3. Management of the feed and fodder sector 
 
 
Overall, management of the feed and fodder sector needs to be improved starting with an inventory of 
existing feeding systems across the country and throughout the year. Surpluses and chronic shortages 
will be identified to develop feed and fodder banks as well as a fodder seedbank/germplasm at district 
level. In the medium term, this inventory will guide the production and diversification will help 
synchronise the needs of animals and the production of feed and fodder. This will allow better planning 
of imports for which bilateral import negotiations should take place. The registration of all feed sellers 
will continue*'. Involvement of and collaboration between different stakeholders will be promoted. At 
the government level, ensuring that the feed sector falls under one single regulatory agency rather than 
several as is currently the case, should help streamline activities. 
4. Promotion of the feed industry 
 
 
Promoting the development of the feed industry will be high in the government's agenda by creating an 
enabling environment where financing is available, electricity and gas supply is stable, there is access 
to technology and knowledge, and taxes on raw materials are not crippling. Anti-oligopoly regulations 
will be considered to ensure that smaller manufacturers are able to enter the market. However, over 
time, it is likely that feed and fodder requirements will change to adapt to a shift from small-holder 
subsistence-oriented mixed farm-based extensive traditional livestock systems to medium/large scale 
 
* The Independent. 2019, Steps taken to bring poultry farmers under registration. 26 January 
es 17 |!

intensive commercial systems. The nature of the feed and fodder industry will also change as the 
increasing consumer demand leads to a faster growth in demand for monogastrics (e.g., poultry, fed 
mainly on protein-rich feed concentrates) relative to ruminants that require more roughages in their 
diets (beef, goats), The nature of the support will therebefore need to be adapted to the evolving needs. 
 
5. Quality and safety assurance 
Quality and safety of feed and fodder will be ensured by enhancing the capacity to test and of the 
infrastructure required. In particular, quality control laboratories should be built including at subnational 
level. Farms/feed mills/hatcheries will be inspected in order to enforce the Fish Feed and Animal Feed 
Act 2010. Adequate storage will be developed and disseminated to farmers to prevent damage and 
deterioration of feed and fodder. 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.1.; Aol 5.2.1. 
e NAP PoA 2020 Programme 1.1 Sustainable production of safe and nutritious food 
e Fish Feed and Animal Feed Act 2010 
Aol 1.1.7, Stimulate the blue economy by promoting the sustainable development of marine 
fisheries and aquaculture in coordination with other non-agricultural uses and the private sector 
Rationale 
The Blue Economy which is prioritised by the PP2041 to sustainably exploit the ocean ecosystem, 
comprises activities that directly or indirectly take place in the seas, oceans and coasts using oceanic 
resources and contribute to sustainable, inclusive economic growth, employment, well-being, while 
preserving the health of the ocean". This sector's contribution to Bangladesh's gross value added is 
estimated at 6.2 billion USD or about 3% in 2015, with around 30 million people depending on it. It 
comprises tourism and recreation (25%), marine capture fisheries and aquaculture (22%), transport 
(22%), and offshore and oil extraction (19%)*'. While traditional sectors, such as capture fisheries and 
marine aquaculture will continue playing a prominent role, the potential of new ocean industries - such 
as marine culture of seaweed and other algae, euglena, mussels, oysters, marine pearls, sea cucumbers, 
and sea urchins - needs to be assessed". The capture fisheries sector is characterized by weak 
governance and management to set, monitor and enforce sustainable catch levels. Lack of access to 
adequate infrastructure, equipment and finance (Aol! 1,1.4) to preserve high value catch are further 
bottlenecks together with the absence of investment-ready enterprises. Against this backdrop, fisher 
households are among the most vulnerable to poverty, food insecurity and natural shocks (Strategies 
4.2 and 4.3). To respond to these issues, the Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries Project (2018- 
2023) aims to sustainably develop the country's enlarged Exclusive Economy Zone. The Ministry of 
Fisheries and Livestock (MoFL) has also adopted a National Aquaculture Development Strategy and 
Action Plan of Bangladesh 2013-2020 which includes the sustainable development of marine fisheries 
resources with involvement of local communities, to promote alternative livelihood opportunities and 
avoid overexploitation of coastal waters resulting from growing trawl capacity and operations. These 
 
4" General Economics Division. 2015. Seventh Five Year Plan 2015-2020. Bangladesh Planning Commission. Government 
of Bangladesh 
4" PG. Patil, J, Virdin, C.S. Colgan, M.G. Hussain, P. Failler, and T. Vegh 2018. Toward a Blue Bconomy: A Pathway for 
Sustainable Growth in Bangladesh, Washington, DC: The World Bank Group. 
* Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2019. Monitoring Report of the Second Country Investment Plan on Food and 
Nutrition Security 2019. Ministry of Food. Government of Bangladesh 
4) World Bank. 2018, "Bangladesh Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries (PAD2473) - Project Appraisal Document, 14 
September 2018" Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice, South Asia Region, 
ts

initiatives were slowed by the impact of COVID-19 in 2020 on coastal aquaculture and shrimp farming, 
which received immediate emergency support targeting logistics and supply chain disruptions in the 
wake of the pandemic", 
Action Agenda 
 
 1.Support a coordinated policy planning process towards the Blue Economy 
The Blue Economy policy planning process should be multisectoral rather than on a sector-by-sector 
basis. A coordinated and multisectoral approach is needed since the traditional industries, such as 
marine fisheries, transport, and shipbuilding, are located in, and exploit the same coastal waters and 
may find Blue Economy opportunities. Developing a common approach and synergies - such as cost- 
sharing of common infrastructure, cross-fertilisation of technology and innovation - will be essential to 
build and preserve human and natural] capital in coastal areas. The active participation of the actors 
involved will be needed as well as a stronger coordination mechanism linked with the Planning 
Commission. To this end, the creation of the Blue Economy Cell established at the Ministry of Power, 
Energy, and Mineral Resources (MoPEMR) is a positive starting point, and its role needs to be 
strengthened as a coordination unit encompassing the participation of all relevant sectors. 
 
 2. Estimate the potential contribution of the Blue Economy 
The Blue Economy is a sustainable ocean economy where economic opportunities are leveraged with 
environmental constraints. It relates to SDG 14 - conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine 
resources for sustainable development as well as to human food markets, nutraceuticals and animal feed 
market. In order to adequately assess the value of the Blue Economy, its non-market flows, 
environmental services and natural capital assets need to be factored in, to be able to adequately 
prioritise marine activities. The starting point will be the creation of an "Ocean account" by the 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), This will consist of designing reliable disaggregated data and 
defining industries falling by typology and location into the ocean account, The final goal is to transform 
this account into a Blue Economy account by introducing externalities and assessments of natural 
capital in coastal areas. 
 
 3. Assess stocks and develop national fishery management plans" 
The DoF will set data and analytical foundations to perform evidence-based fisheries management, In 
line with the 8FYP, DoF will carry out regular stock surveys on shrimp, demersal and pelagic 
(especially tuna and tuna like) stocks; and prepare national fisheries management plans, based on zonal 
and/or species), through a participatory approach. 
 
4, Enable investment in sustainable fisheries 
DoF will strengthen fishery policies, regulatory frameworks and institutional capacity to reduce 
investment risks due to regulatory and enforcement gaps. DoF will conduct awareness-raising 
programmes. Different fishers' and boat owners' associations (both industrial and artisanal) and 
relevant government entities, such as the Coast Guard, Navy, Police, Bangladesh Land Port Authority, 
Chittagong Port Authority and Customs, and other stakeholders will be involved. 
 
" World Bank. 2021. "Bangladesh Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries (P 161568) - Implementation Status and Results 
Report". 
** Occan Economy is defined as the sum of economic activities in ocean-based industries and the assets, goods, and services 
of marine coosystems (OECD, 2016 "The Ocean Economy im 2030"), 
World Bank. 2021. Op. cit. 
es 19 fi!

5. Develop a "Monitor, Control and Surveillance System" and reduce illegal unregulated 
and unreported fishing 
The monitoring, control, and surveillance system (MCS) needs to be strengthened. Less than 3% of the 
artisanal fleet currently holds valid fishing licenses, and only about 50% of the industrial fleet is subject 
to partial MCS. To this end, DoF and the Marine Mercantile Department (MMD) will expand and 
strengthen fishermen identification and fishing vessel registration and licensing. This will be done 
through the implementation of industrial and artisanal fleet vessels' monitoring systems, for instance 
by introducing the Automatic Identification System. 
 
 6. Improve infrastructure and production practices" 
This action aims to close the gap in basic infrastructure - from access to power and water supply (Aol 
2.2.3) to postharvest collection and handling facilities (Aol 2.1.1), which are essential to allow fisher 
communities competitive market access - and in post-harvest practices (avoid quality deterioration and 
loss of produce) to promote integrated value chain development and compliance with standards. Where 
feasible, infrastructure investments will focus on "green technology" for seafood production in support 
of ecosystem services and coastal protection, ¢.g., mangroves rehabilitation, sea grass and oyster beds. 
Activities will include the following: infrastructure improvements for capture and culture fisheries; 
value chain and food safety development (compliance with food safety standards and preserving 
postharvest value of catch by strengthening DoF's capacity to monitor and sanction biosecurity 
compliance); and boosting coastal aquaculture productivity (leverage private sector initiatives to pilot 
mariculture production and commercialization) 
 
 7.Sustain community empowerment and livelihoods" "" 
Through a community-driven approach, this action aims at strengthening fisheries' management and 
reducing dependency on artisanal coastal fishing. This will be done by piloting various models of 
fishing villages, for instance, focusing on mariculture, processing and women's empowerment (Aol 
5.4.2). The following activities will be implemented: adaptive research, training and extension aimed 
at developing low-input and low-cost mariculture systems (Aol 1.12); supporting fishing community 
institutions and alternative livelihoods development; and business development and market linkages 
(Aol, 1.1.9) for alternative livelihoods, with a focus on young women and men. 
Cross references 
© NFPSP PoA Aol 1.1.2: 1.1.4; 1.1.9.; 2.1.1; 2.2.3; 5.4.2. 
e PP2041 
© S8FYP 2020-2025 
e¢ National Aquaculture Development Strategy and Action Plan of Bangladesh (2013 - 2020) 
The World Bank Bangladesh Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries (P 161568) 
Aol 1.1.8. Develop and promote eco-friendly and responsible practices for animal health along 
the principles of "One Health" 
Rationale 
Good animal husbandry practices at farm level, from procuring and rearing healthy animals, their 
welfare, to final slaughter or milking, is an essential component of the production of quality and safe 
foodTM. In Bangladesh, an estimated 25% of the population is directly involved with livestock 
management, exposing them to diseases and further transmission in the human population. The high 
 
7 World Bank. 2021. Op. cit. 
* World Bank. 2021, Op, cit 
* Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock & FAO. 2014, National Aquaculture Development Strategy and Action Plan of 
Bangladesh 2013-2020. Government of Bangladesh and FAO 
"! Bhilegaonkar, Rawat & Agarwal. 2014. Food Safety Assurance Systems: Good Animal Husbandry Practice, Encyclopedia 
of Food Safety, Volume 4, Pages 168-173. 
lo

density of, and interaction between humans and livestock, coupled with the fragile and flood-prone 
ecosystem, increases Bangladesh's risk for zoonotic diseases, emerging and re-emerging infectious 
diseases and pandemics, Yet, Bangladesh has limited medical and veterinary health services 
infrastructure. There is a shortage of trained health workers, significant gaps in service provision, 
frequent drug and commodity stock-outs, and lack of proper information about the health services that 
are available. Farmers are often unaware and reluctant to use medicines. Since the inception of the 
National Livestock Policy in 2007, several key areas were identified to address the challenges and 
encourage harnessing the opportunities for the development of a thriving livestock sector. The National 
Poultry Development Policy 2008 was formulated to encourage poultry industry and to control quality 
of inputs for sustainable poultry development, Other policies have been in place to handle animal health 
and development: the Diseases of Animal Act 2005, the Animal and Anima! Product Quarantine Act 
2005, the Fish Feed and Animal Feed Act 2010, the Animal Slaughter and Meat Control Act 2011, the 
1992 Breeding Policy, and the National Livestock Extension Policy 2013. In 2008, the One Health 
approach*' was adopted and in 2012 the Strategic Framework for One Health Approach to Infectious 
Diseases developed. While this is a big step towards institutionalising this approach for prevention, 
detection and contro! of infectious diseases at the human animal ecosystem interface, a lot remains to 
be done to implement the approach. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Formulate and implement an Outbreak Investigation and Response Strategy Plan and 
Standard Operating Procedures 
A One Health approach to respond to an endemic Outbreak Investigation and Response Strategy Plan 
and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) (Output 2.2. under Outcome 2 and Component 2 of the One 
Health Strategic Framework and Action Plan) needs to be formulated and implemented. Coordination 
is essential for outbreak preparedness and response, particularly at the operational level. To strengthen 
the outbreak detection, investigation and response enhanced collaborations need to be made between 
the human and animal health sectors, and wherever appropriate, the environmental sector as well. The 
plan needs to be developed in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), 
MoFL, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ministry of Enyironment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEFCC), and the Ministry of Food (MoFood). These ministries need to conduct joint risk analysis 
and develop a joint action plan that links the plan to the National Disaster Management Plan. The 
Government needs to make budgetary allocations for coordinated outbreak response with clearly 
defined roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders which needs to be part of the Outbreak 
Investigation and Response Strategy Plan. A One Health approach will be needed to combat 
antimicrobial resistance by integrating environmental, aquatic, and wildlife issues into current 
approaches. 
 
 2. Develop a communication strategy for One Health 
Networking and communication are important in providing the necessary support for livestock farmers, 
local administration and communities. A communication strategy needs to be developed for One Health 
with specific focus on zoonotic diseases; support is required to enable social and behaviour change 
communication capacity among the stakeholders and a nationwide outreach programme for the 
advocacy and dissemination of One Health Strategy needs to be built. Since there is weak coordination 
between the stakeholders with respect to sharing of information, including government and non- 
government organizations, processes should be established to enable individuals and communities to 
develop the knowledge, attitudes and skills to use information in assessing their own situations and to 
take action for protecting their health, livelihoods and ecosystems against disease conditions. 
 
*! The "One Health" concept was introduced in Bangladesh in 2007 and has been the key tool to respond to emerging diseases 
such as avian influenza, anthrax and chikungunyas. It is a multidisciplinary collaborative platform to combat the challenges of 
emerging infectious diseases and other health issues arising at human-animal interface in a complex ecosystem. 
es 21 ||

3. Develop a standard supply chain for vaccines with robust inventory management 
A standard supply chain for vaccines with robust inventory management will be developed using 
international standards and strict enforcement. Currently, uncertified veterinarians often exploit the lack 
of information at farmer level®*. Adequate infrastructure will be built and rules enforced to prevent 
counterfeiting, tampering, contamination and theft. Capacities to use this infrastructure (laboratories for 
example) and manage it, will be built. The possibility of community-based animal health workers which 
has shown promising results in other countries will be explored (as suggested in CSAIP for 
Bangladesh*'), Planning and inventory management will be improved, product flows optimising and 
waste minimised by designing a track and trace system. 
Cross references 
e Strategic Framework and Action Plan for the Application of a One Health Approach in 
Bangladesh (2017 - 2021): Output 2.2. SOPs for surveillance and outbreak investigation under 
Outcome 2 and Component 2 (Coordinated surveillance) 
Aol 1.1.9. Strengthen the role of producers' organizations and cooperatives to reduce the cost 
of production, improve market access, and increasing the prices received by producers 
Rationale 
Producers' Organizations (POs) and cooperatives in Bangladesh play a vital role in employment 
creation, poverty alleviation, and socio-economic development in the agro-food sector both for 
producers and agents involved further down the value chain (see Aol 2.2.4). They reduce the costs that 
farmers face, broaden their access to markets and increase the prices they receive thus increasing their 
competitiveness. The cost of production is lowered through collective management, mechanization, and 
organized marketing, Such organisations improve market access by offering combined marketing 
platforms, e-commerce platforms and cold chain management, processing, and packaging services, 
otherwise out-of-reach for lone smaller farmers. They also help increase the profitability of the 
producers by promoting contract farming, digital marketing systems, helping to ensure timely input 
supply and utility services, and extension services. Horizontal cooperation such as the aggregation of 
production, processing, and marketing activities can lead to economies of scale for farmers and reduce 
the cost of production and marketing. Cost reduction can also be achieved through the economies of 
scale achieved in bringing producers together in input management and technical assistance, as well as 
in commercial logistic management. Mechanization is another important area of cost reduction for 
agricultural produce. POs and cooperatives may ease market entry barriers for processing high-value 
and nutritious foods such as milk, meat, and fish, providing the required legal and compliance status 
such as sanitary certifications, environmental compliance certifications, and business registrations. The 
role of POs and cooperatives is clear in the context of Bangladesh and has been recognised with the 
existence of a National Cooperative Policy 2012 and the creation of a Rural Development and 
Cooperatives Division (RDCD). Yet the cooperative movement has weakened over the past few decades 
and many farmer organizations have become inactive* requiring measures to revive it. 
 
*? World Bank. 2019. Bangladesh Climate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plan, 
> hid. 
* Milovanovit, V. and Smutka, L. 2016. Cooperative farming and food security within rural Bangladesh. Agrarian 
Perspectives XXV. Global and European Challenges for Food Production, Agribusiness and the Rural Economy, Proceedings 
of the 25th International Scientific Conference, 14-16 September 2016, Prague, Czech Republic

Action Agenda 
 
 1. Ease the registration process of POs and cooperatives 
POs and cooperatives' registration process should be easy and fast-tracked. Compliance in registering 
is limited as organization sometimes lack the documentation required or understanding of the 
procedures. The development of a digital registration system may help in this regard. 
 
 2. Increase financial services and other ancillaries for POs and cooperatives (see Aol 1.1.4) 
Access to financial services such as credit and insurance services should be increased for POs and 
cooperatives, Substantial loans can be procured through such organisations towards, for example, 
market infrastructure, the development of transportation facilities, cold-chain management, or storage 
capacity improvement. Low-cost credit services may be provided towards the development of nutrition- 
sensitive value chains (NSVC). Necessary ancillary services such as financial literacy training may also 
be provided as appropriate. 
 
 3. Increase training and build capacity of POs and cooperatives 
Training and capacity building are required to strengthen the POs and cooperatives based on a needs 
assessment. Improving their internal structure and organization such as their decision-making 
processes, rules and regulations setting, information sharing modalities, and system of compensation 
should be given priority in strengthening their capacity. It is also essential to build capacity to negotiate 
and develop proposals in order to build coordination process and contractual relations. 
 
 4. Adapt support to POs and cooperatives to their diverse needs 
The diversity of POs and cooperatives is also an important indicator of balanced growth of the food 
and agricultural sector. The different needs that arise in remote rural areas and peri-urban areas must 
be addressed properly. In remote rural areas, POs and cooperatives require very different support as 
their market connections and economic opportunities are very different from those of peri-urban areas, 
Cross references 
« NENSP PoA Aol 1.1.4.; 2.2.4. 
 
Aol 1.2.1. Promote diversification into horticulture, fisheries, livestock, poultry and dairy 
products with high nutrient and micronutrient content including regional and ethnic foods 
Rationale 
Agricultural diversification is the basis for diversified diets with high nutrient and micronutrient 
content. Increased supply of nutritious products encourages consumption by making them more 
accessible to the poor and directly improves their nutritional status. It also indirectly improves the 
nutritional status of poor farmers through the income pathway as farmers carn more income by selling 
such high value products. The pace of diversification has been slow in Bangladesh. Cereal crops still 
account for over 50% of the agricultural GDP®, with the livestock sector remaining stagnant at around 
10%. The predominance of the crop sector is largely due to rice production which still accounts for a 
third of the total food value added. The fisheries sector has, however, shown some growth in its 
agricultural GDP share and holds much potential for future growth. Agricultural diversification is a 
market-driven process with farmers responding to increased market demand for high-value food 
products with income growth. Diversification and commercialisation of agriculture tend to reinforce 
each other. Interventions that improve the marketing systems (such as marketing infrastructure, cold 
 
> Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU). 2020. Op. cit. 
es 23 ||

chains, and market information) facilitate commercialisation and, in doing so, support the process of 
diversification. Similarly, interventions that enhance farmers' ability to make informed choices 
regarding new products and manage the risk involved in such new activities efficiently tend to facilitate 
diversification and ultimately, commercialisation. The drive for increased diversification also needs to 
include regional and cthnic foods which often fall under the NUS: not only do they often have superior 
nutritional qualities, but they also require limited inputs, can be grown on marginal lands and are casily 
intereropped or rotated with staple crops, and easily fit into integrated practices such as agro-ecologyTM. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Develop and disseminate improved production technologies for non-cereals crops and 
animal source food 
The broader aspect of this component is discussed in some detail in the context of Aol 1.1.1. All those 
interventions are equally applicable here as well. As the focus is on diversification, the emphasis here 
will be in identifying innovations and new crop combinations that improve productivity at the systems 
level by exploiting complementarity among production activities. An example would be to grow a 
leguminous catch crop that takes advantage of residual soil moisture and nitrogen after rice harvest. 
Similarly, opportunities may exist to use the poultry manure to supplement fertiliscrs. Such 
complementarity in resource use promotes diversification. 
 
 
2. Reduce risk through promotion of contract farming 
Risk averse farmers may consider cash-input intensive production of commercial crops such as fruit 
and vegetables too risky due to their perishable nature and uncertain prices, Contract farming helps to 
reduce such risks to the farmer by transferring some of these risks to the contracting company and 
should therefore be encouraged. Although these contractual arrangements are between private sector 
entities, the Government needs to design regulations that ensure transparency, fairness, and 
enforceability of such contracts. 
 
3. Invest in marketing, storage, and processing infrastructures for facilitating rapid access 
to markets while minimizing the losses in transit 
This component is discussed in detail in Aol 2.1.1. While most of these investments may be made by 
the private sector, there is clearly a role for public sector investment in creating public goods such as 
farm-to-market road, establishing and regulating local market yards, and promoting private sector 
investments through public-private partnerships, credit support and regulatory support. 
 
 4, Establish agricultural marketing information systems 
This component is discussed in detail in the context of Aol 2.2.5. An efficient agricultural marketing 
information system that can provide easily understood reliable marketing information in a timely 
manner js essential for supporting market-oriented diversification, Clearly, [CT-based approaches have 
a major role in this context. 
 
5. Promote the cultivation of regional and ethnic foods (as suggested by NPAN2 Key Action 
Area 6.2.1 and following NAP PoA 2020 Program 1.4) 
Regional and ethnic foods that are particularly nutrient-dense should be identified for their 
production and consumption (see Aol 3.2.1) to be prioritised and promoted*', The CIP2 Monitoring 
Report (MR20) recommends that NUS -often synonymous with ethnic and regional foods- be promoted 
through Food-Based Dietary Guidelines (FBDG), Furthermore, the Food Composition Tables (FCTs), 
must document the nutrient composition of such foods, The collection and conservation of germplasm 
 
© Li, X, & Siddique, K.H_M, 2018_ Future Smart Food - Rediscovering hidden treasures of neglected and underutilized species 
for Zero Hunger in Asia. Bangkok. FAO 
*' Such work has already been initiated by BARI as seen in the Bangladesh chapter in Li and Siddique (2018) quoted above. 
a

of prioritised foods should be strengthened, and genetic diversity should be exploited in breeding 
programmes for developing high yielding varieties with tolerance to biotic and abiotic stressesTM. 
Cross references 
© NFNSP PoA Aols 1.1.1; 1.2.5.; 2.1.12; 2.2.5; 3.2.1. 
e NAP PoA 2020: Programme 1.4: Agriculture in special geographical areas 
e NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.1] Strengthening of integrated homestead food production with 
emphasis on indigenous, underutilized and nutritious varieties/species/breeds) and gender 
sensitive and climate smart technologies 
Aol 1.2.2. Increase funding and improve efficiency of R&D for sustainable agriculture 
Rationale 
The critical role of improved technologies in increasing the availability of staple cereals and nutrient- 
dense food is established in Aol 1.1.1. The focus here is on investments in R&D needed to generate 
such technologies rapidly and the institutional setup needed to increase the overall efficiency of the 
R&D process. The current level of funding in agricultural R&D in Bangladesh is low relative to the 
gross value of agricultural products. For each USD 100 worth of agricultural products, the country 
spends only USD 0.38 in agricultural R&D, far below the UN recommended target of 1% of agricultural 
GDP for developing countries. Recent data indicate that the share of agricultural research expenditures 
in the total agricultural budget dropped significantly in 2018/19 from the level in 2015/16°', Increased 
funding is needed not only to establish modern research facilities and infrastructure, but also to upgrade 
the quality and scope of agricultural education for building an appropriately trained pool of agricultural 
scientists for the future, In addition to raising the research intensity, there is a need to redress the current 
imbalance in the allocation of research expenditure to crop, livestock and fisheries sectors which 
currently accounts for 53% of the total R&D expenditure. Within the crop sector, the allocation to pulses 
and oilseeds may need to be increased from the current total combined share of 9% only. The efficiency 
and effectiveness of the multi-institutional research system is constrained by several factors including 
the limited authority of the apex organization (BARC) over fund allocation, poor linkages with 
agricultural universities in the conduct of research, limited collaboration across research centres, and 
somewhat bureaucratic operational procedures. The research system requires implementation of 
reforms to overcome these constraints and improve its efficiency and effectiveness. 
Action Agenda 
The action agenda to implement this Aol is largely captured in Program 3.1 of the NAP PoA 2020 
(Quality Investment in Agricultural Research for Development). 
 
1. Boost budget allocation for public sector R&D 
The NAP PoA 2020 proposes a 20% increase in R&D budget per year for the next five years. This will 
bring the research intensity close to the attainable value of 0.76, but still short of the target of 1% of the 
agricultural GDP. Funding should be directed to areas priority areas flagged in this PoA and other 
strategic government documents. Together with this, policy reforms are needed to incentivise 
private sector investments, especially in proprietary technologies such as the development of hybrid 
varieties of nutrient-dense vegetables and fruits. Capacities to carry out research will need to be further 
 
 
S# As suggested by BARI in Li and Siddique (2018) quoted above. 
" Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU),2020. Op. cit, 
"! Kabir, W. & Md.L. Saiyed (eds). 2011. National Agricultural Research System in SAARC Countries- An Analysis of System 
Diversity, SAARC Agriculture Centre 
es 25 ||

developed notably in academia with special emphasis on advanced and novel fields such as gene editing, 
nanotechnology, or advanced breeding techniques. 
 
 2.Promote R&D funding for non-staple nutrient-dense agricultural products 
The second area of intervention is to redress the imbalance in the allocation of research funding to staple 
cereals vis-a-vis nutrient-dense agricultural products such as pulses, oilseeds, nuts, meat, eggs, and fish. 
As Bangladesh has already achieved self-sufficiency in rice, it is an opportune time to accelerate 
diversification to other crops by increasing the R&D support for improved technologies for the 
production of nutrient-dense foods. Similarly, increased support to regional research centres in hills, 
char, Barind, haor and coastal areas to address specific constraints in these areas is another dimension 
for improving the balance of the R&D investment portfolio. 
 
3. Carry out institutional reforms in the NARS 
Major constraints that have limited the effectiveness and efficiency of NARS have been identified 
already but the actual reform process has been slow. These reform areas include: (a) improving the 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation of research programs across NARS institutes, notably between 
BRRI, BARI and BINA; and (b) improving the autonomy and accountability of NARS institutes, The 
situation is expected to improve as Thematic Area 3 of the NAP PoA 2020 is implemented, The current 
PoA will support and leverage the work done under the NAP PoA 2020. The final area of intervention 
is strengthening the human resource development of NARS. The potential sets of activities include 
(a)investing in increasing the scientific strength through sponsoring more researchers for advanced 
degrees; (b) focusing the training programs in new high potential areas such as biotechnology, 
geographic information systems, nano-technology and ICT; and (c) building a stronger linkage between 
research institutes and agricultural universities. The PoA will build on research capacity strengthening 
efforts of the National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP). 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.1. 
* NAP PoA 2020: Programme |,1 Sustainable production of safe and nutritious food; 3.1 Quality 
Investment in Agricultural Research for Development; Thematic Area 3: Investment in 
modernisation of agricultural research, education, and extension 
Aol 1.2.3. Improve the availability of safe nutritious food through innovation and expansion of 
appropriate methods of urban-based food production 
Rationale 
In Bangladesh, urban populations experience multiple forms of malnutrition -undernutrition and 
micronutrient deficiencies on the one hand, and overweight and obesity on the other- more acutely than 
rural ones. Currently, nearly one-third of Bangladesh's population lives in towns and cities and this is 
only set to increase as the country advances towards the status of middle-income country, calling for 
adequate policies to mect the FNS of urban dwellers. Urban households purchase almost all their food. 
This makes their access to food reliant on retail markets to offer diversified, affordable, safe and 
nutritious food. Urban food availability is undergoing profound transformation, progressively shifting 
from traditional foods and markets towards increasing availability of processed foods, fast-foods, foods 
that are cheap, energy dense and nutrient poor, and modern retailing of food. An important consequence 
of this transformation is that food supply chains to urban areas are longer and more complex and this 
makes them subject to various risks of food contamination (in storage, processing, transport, retail, 
restaurants, etc.). Long supply chains, with more actors and longer transport can increase food prices, 
require additional infrastructure, such as for storage, and increase in Food Loss and Waste (FLW). 
Urban and peri-urban food production can shorten the supply chain. To accommodate the limited space 
and land available, practices such as rooftop gardening must be promoted and innovations suchas vertical 
gardens using hydroponics developed and disseminated.

Action Agenda 
 
 1. Promote rooftop gardening and microgardens 
Rooftop gardening in urban areas has become popular in recent years as a reaction to widespread 
contamination and adulteration of food. The COVID-19 pandemic also contributed to the expansion 
of this practice as it provided a reliable and sustainable source of nutritious food at a time where food 
chains were disrupted because of the national lockdown and prices skyrocketed. For some, it even 
became an alternative source of food. Incentives for more houscholds to adopt this practice will be 
given, also for its positive impacts on the environment. Concurrently, demonstrations will be 
carried out (see NAP PoA 2020 Aol 1.4.1). Microgardens, also called "precision decision gardening", 
that fit in very small farming plots such as balconies, small yards and rooftops in urban settings, also 
offer high-yield opportunities to grow leafy green vegetables and other high-value food crops. 
Containers such as plastic-lined wooden boxes, trash cans and even old car tyres can be used for 
microgardens, making it accessible to modest households. Widespread information and training can be 
provided to encourage widespread adoption. Microgardens are ideal to grow microgreens which require 
very little space, These are yegetable greens (not sprouts or shoots) which are harvested just after the 
cotyledon leaves haye developed. They are an excellent source of micronutrients and nutritional 
compounds like antioxidants, and dietary fibre. They often contain higher vitamin, mineral, fibre and 
antioxidant levels than the same quantity of mature greens for which they need to be popularised on a 
large scale. 
2. Popularise vertical farming 
 
 
Vertical farming, a means to tackle limited land availability, is still in an early stage of development in 
Bangladesh and needs to be scaled up in urban settings (see NAP PoA 2020 Aol 1.4.1). This technique 
has the potential to slash transport costs and COz, as well as reduce the spoilage associated with 
transporting food from rural areas. Other advantages to this type of farming are avoidance of climatic 
shocks, disasters and pests, water recycling, provision of energy to the grid through the methane 
generation from compost and the creation of jobs in urban areas. Not all crops are suited to vertical 
farming and research is needed to expand the range of fruits, crops and vegetables that are suited to this 
approach, Setting up vertical farms requires higher investment and also entails procurement of 
specialized inputs and availability of technologies such as LED lights, drip irrigation and airflow 
controliers, which need to be made available locally, Research must be carried out to make this 
technology more affordable and less power hungry."' Vertical farming can help replace some of the 
unsustainable agricultural practices that have been presenting threat to species and ecosystems, 
especially in high salinity areas such as in the South. The private sector is involved in this, but there is 
scope for encouraging R&D and strengthening cooperation between the private sector and the 
Government. 
 
 3. Expand the use of hydroponics and aquaponics 
Training will be delivered to different stakeholders to impart knowledge and skills on how to use 
hydroponics in a safe and sustainable way. This technique will be expanded as it allows cultivation in 
limited spaces. Other advantages are the absence of weeds, other soil-borne pests, and toxic pesticide 
residue, and year-round production. BARI''s work on assisting farmers in cultivating vegetables in 
abandoned ponds and water bodies to make floating beds will be further expanded. Aquaponics, a 
system of growing crops and fish together in a recirculating water system, will also be promoted with 
adequate training imparted to avoid waterborne diseases. This system allows the production of both 
 
" Benke, K. & Tomkins, B. 2017, Future food-production systems: vertical farming and controlled-environment agriculture. 
Sustainability: Science. Practice and Policy, 13:1, 13-26 
es 27 ||

vegetables and fish with no soil, no fertilisers or pesticides, The setup cost for aquaponics is substantial 
- unlike the recurring costs associated with it- and will need financing. 
 
 4, Boost R&D for urban and peri-urban agriculture 
R&D to develop other techniques will be carried out-and encouraged to enhance urban and peri-urban 
agriculture and cooperation between government agencies, non-state research institutes and the private 
sector, ensbled with the right incentives. These actions should be developed alongside measures taken 
under Strategies 3.1 and 3.2, that aim to develop a long-term national plan for ensuring safe, nutritious 
and sustainable diets and enhance nutrition knowledge, promote good dietary practices and encourage 
consumption of safe and nutritious diets. 
Cross references 
¢ NFNSP Strategies 3.1.; 3.2. 
* NAP PoA 2020: Aol 1.4.1: Strengthening urban horticulture and vertical farming 
2? ae

3. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 2 of the PoA 
 
Out Tee tte eR Ce mies CeCe et tier til el els 
Strategy 2.1 Improve market access and stabilize food markets 
Aol 2.1.1, Promote the establishment, improvement and management of post-harvest marketing 
infrastructure and processing facilities for horticultural products, pulses and legumes, livestock 
and fisheries 
Rationale 
Post-harvest infrastructure and processing facilities for fruits, vegetables, non-cereal crops, livestock 
and fishery products are key to reducing risk and improving farmers' income, enhancing access to safe 
and nutrient dense foods for consumers, and reducing FLW. Marketing infrastructure include rural 
roads, railways, cold transportation and storage, growth centres and rural markets. As of 2020, there 
were more than 400 private cold storage facilities for potatoes but cold transportation and storage 
facilities for other perishables were still insufficient. Supermarket retailers are most likely to have an 
interest and resources to invest in refrigerated transportation facilities, temperature-controlled 
warehouses and distribution centres. Processing facilities can be: primary, typically on-farm and 
commonly used to prepare crops for storage and further processing (e.g., washing, peeling, drying, 
slicing), thereby ensuring that crops do not spoil; secondary, ensuring the conversion of ingredients into 
edible products; and tertiary, for the production of prepared convenience foods. Farm processing 
facilities have the potential to increase value addition at the farmgate and - coupled with the 
mainstreaming of producers' associations and farmers' centres - can contribute to improving farmers' 
knowhow, knowledge, technology and bargaining power. Large scale processors are already engaged 
with secondary and tertiary processing which includes improved packaging - from materials utilized, to 
technologies to reduce food contamination along the assembly line (Aol 2.3.1) - and aligns with the 
post-harvest loss reduction strategy (Strategy 5.2), The creation of an enabling environment for food 
processing (Aol 2.2.3) and securing property nghts (Aol 2.1.4) are important drivers of the profitability 
for private investments and innovation, targeted as essential elements In the PP2041 for agroprocessing. 
Proper planning (short, medium and long-term), management and allocation of adequate resources are 
necessary to ensure post-harvest infrastructure and processing facilities development. To this end, 
establishing private-public partnerships is essential. 
Action Agenda 
 
1, Support the expansion and maintenance of transportation infrastructure at both national and 
__ local level 
Bangladesh will boost connectivity between different transport modalities, and will strengthen arterial 
transport corridors, and bypass and connecting roads. The PP204] aims to equip every village with a 
climate resilient core road network. This will be adapted to the geographical idiosyncrasies: for 
example, submerged and elevated roads will be built in Ager areas. Collaboration between the 
government and Development Partners (DPs) - and notably the Asian Development Bank (ADB), 
committed to support the financing of infrastructural development in the country- will continue, While 
roads, including feeder roads, will continue to be developed, land constraints, environmental concerns 
and cost considerations will mean a greater emphasis on inland water transport and railways, which 
both remain under-utilised (as per the PP2041), Thus, emphasis will be given to investments towards 
major programmes of railway upgrading, intermodal transport connectivity, including in char areas, 
and river dredging to enable river transportation, Moreover, improvements in key land ports such as the 
Panchagarh land port connecting to India, Nepal and Bhutan- will ensure increased volume of exports. 
as 29 |!

'These infrastructural improvements will benefit development of NSVC tremendously by connecting 
rural and production areas with large markets, 
2. Facilitate the establishment, improvement, management and maintenance of cold storage and | 
transportation facilities for perishable nutrient rich foods (as per Aol 5.2.1 and 5.2.2) 
Storage facilities will be expanded rapidly for penshable foods in the coming years. Private sector actors 
have started establishing cold chains in cettain subsectors (¢.2., Bengal Meut Logistic Company, and 
potato subsector); this will be stimulated in other sectors also such as, fisheries, in a coordinated manner 
through Private Public Partnerships (PPP), especially involving supermarket retailers. PPPs associated 
with adequate traceability mechanisms. and regulatory frameworks (Ao! 5.1.2) will ensure both 
innovation and compliance to food safety standards, They will be essential to ensure establishment and 
maintenance of regional market hubs, cold storages, wurchouses, modern growth centres, union 
parishad complexes and cold chain transportation facilities (including through railway cool chains). 
3. Invest in the establishment of processing infrastructure, including on-farm, and storage | 
facilities 
While the private sector is investing significantly in processing and improved marketing to meet 2 
growing domestic demand, access to knowhow and technology must also be provided to small 
producers to facilitate processing, including on-farm, to prevent produce from spoiling and nutrient 
content loss (see Aol $.2.1 and Aol §.2.2.). Adequate processing opens up market opportunities by 
allowing produce to be sold further, including abroed, and with greater time lage without spoilage. 
 
Crass references. 
* NFPSP PoA Aol 2.1.6; Aol 2.3.3; Strategy 5.2; Aol 5.2.1; Aol 5.2.2; Aol 5.5.3 
PP2041 . 
Aol 2.1.2. Set up financial intermediation services with improved access to credit for ugro- 
processors along with other complementary services: 
Rutionale 
Improved access to credit is essential to develop NSVC at both primary production (see Aol 1.1.4} and 
agroprocessing and marketing levels, To ensure that Micro, Smal! and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
are able to invest in process and product innovations, in marketing infrastructure (such as growth 
centers) and processing facilities, financing is necded through mechanisms such us credit, savings, und 
insurance products. For example, the dearth of low-temperature storage facilities and cool transportation 
favilitics for perishabics are of serious concern in Bangladesh; appropriate financial initiatives such as 
credit und insurance schemes would help fill this gap, thereby tackling the problem of food losses and 
preservation of food nutnents (Aof 2.1.1). Yet the challenges to accessing finance along the food valuc 
chains {F VCs) reflect those faced by farmers: from high interest rates, to the need for collaterals, poor 
diversity in financial products and services to meet the different types of demand,TM This is coupled with 
rural users showing a preference for informal lenders, the main agents operating in the FVC, who are 
able to quickly respond te the growing demand for financing. Initiutives exist to. finance agro-MSMEs; 
for exumple, Bangladesh Krishi Bank and the Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank (RAKUB) have special 
credit programmes to promote entreprencurship in smail agro-enterprises. Public finance slone cannot 
respond to the needs and private finance nrust be tapped into, Complementing financial services with 
technical assistance, mobile financial services, credit goarantee schemes, and quality compliance 
services can enhunce their value to the beneficiaries, 
 
@ World Bank..2020, Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bungladewh: Policy ued Investment Priotizies,

Action Agenda 
 
1. Adapt financial services to the needs of post-harvest FVCs 
Steps will be taken to improve the credit market through a range of measures including credit bureaus, 
credit guarantee schemes, and a range of FinTech initiatives, in order to improve credit market 
information, reduce compliance and information costs and lower credit risk with particular focus on the 
poor (as per the PP2041). In this regard, the 8F YP proposes to convert the SME Foundation (the Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SME) financing window of the Bangladesh Bank) into Small Business 
Agency (SBA)-a one-stop platform with one of the key functions being improved access to institutional 
credit. Novel payment systems such as a digitized payment system will be further developed to expand 
MSMEs'' financial access through mobile financial services. Commercial loans should be considered 
regardless of their value to include even the smallest entrepreneurs. Innovative tools like warehouse 
receipt financing for post-harvest financing will be developed, collaterals demanded should move 
beyond the current property-based collateral. For example, the collateral registry's mandate could be 
expanded to also include moveable collateral such as machineries and equipment." While so far the 
legal and regulatory structure of the mobile-payments system is restrictive by only allowing for a bank- 
led model, the system should be expanded to include a broader range of financial services." Efforts will 
need to be made to improve the insolvency and debt resolution solution for MSMEs, for instance by 
providing dedicated lines of credit to marketing-processing cooperatives and associations whereby the 
groups jointly guarantee the loans (Aol 2.2.1). 
 
2. Expand financial services to develop agro-processing activities, with a particular focus on 
rural areas and women 
Financing facilities must be expanded to allow the development of agro-processing activities. In the 
spirit of "leaving no one behind" advocated by the PP2041, cfforts should be made to expand access to 
financing -both bank and non-bank- to those traditionally excluded especially in rural areas, and women 
in particular. Innovative approaches will be developed. For example, growth centres may become self- 
Sustaining using the revenues generated. Growth centres will be established in each upazila in order, 
among other things, to facilitate credit (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Aol 1.6.1 and Aol 3.1.2). The 
establishment of growth centres by PQs in particular, will be incentivized. Finance will also be directed 
at E-commerce platforms, digital marketplaces and individual sellers whose development will be 
encouraged beyond Dhaka and other urban areas. Financial support is also essential if MSMEs are to 
improve their practices (for example by adopting Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP), Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Points (HACCP), ISO certification, etc.) for ensuring food safety. It is essential to increase the credit 
facilities to the MSMEs in the FVC to support the acquisition of post-harvest technologies such as 
plastic crates for bulk packaging, harvesting tools, hot water treatment tank to eliminate pests and 
diseases. Encouraging MSMEs to link up with each other (Aol 2.2.1) and create groups and associations 
(Aol 2.2.4) should also help facilitate their financial inclusion. 
3. Develop insurance services for MSMEs and other risk financing | 
Increased investment in insurance services for MSMEs and risk financing im the FVC is essential for 
establishing NSVC. Insurance services with clientele-friendly premium services and other 
complementary services will be developed. Existing microinsurance developed by MFIs will be 
invigorated and its coverage extended. Other types of risk financing mechanism such as credit guarantee 
schemes and crowdfunding platform will be launched to create opportunities for equity financing for 
microenterprises, marketing-processing cooperatives and associations. Risk financing mechanism 
should include risk-sharing facilities which offer partial credit guarantees that partially offset loan losses 
 
" Jbid. 
* As suggested by World Bank and PRI. 2019. Financing Solutions For Micro, Small And Medium Enterprises In Bangladesh 
a 31 ||

by private financial intermediaries upon the ultimate beneficiary's default. This allows to leverage 
public resources, alleviate enterprise collateral constraints and reduce the project risk®. 
Cross references 
1. NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.4; 2.1.1; 2.2.1; 2.2.4; 3.1.2 
2. NAP PoA2020: Key Aol NAP PoA 1.6.1. Establishing "Growth Centre" in each upazila for 
facilitating access to credit, quality inputs, sale of agricultural produce, temporary storage and 
marketing 
3. PP2041 
4, 8FYP 2020-2025 
Aol 2.1.3. Maintain an orderly market management by securing property rights, regulating 
competition, and stabilizing prices 
Rationale 
Improving market access and stabilising food markets requires maintaining orderly market management 
systems, This can be achieved by adequately protecting property rights and incentivizing competition. 
By securing property rights, conditions are created to generate return on investments. Patenting in the 
agro-food sector in Bangladesh is applicable to various agricultural stakeholders such as input providers 
(sceds, germplasm, transgenic plants animals), cold chain technology and food processing technology 
(e.g.,to stabilise colour and improve taste)", Avoiding inefficiencies related to market dominance and 
entry barriers by promoting competition and ensuring symmetric access to information is essential for 
newcomers to invest. A positive enabling environment for investment (see Aol 2.2.3) and for 
innovation, could generate large investments in the food sector in the near future. However, according 
to the Global Innovation index 2020 of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), 
Bangladesh is still underperforming in innovation in relation to its level of per capita GDP, with a low 
level of intellectual property receipts®'. Intellectual property rights' enforcement is therefore needed to 
ensure innovation". Concurrently, private investments, if not carefully regulated, are likely to generate 
dominant positions in certain subsectors, to increase price volatility (see also Aol 2.1.2, 2.2.5), which 
would in turn threaten the livelihood of small-scale farmers (see Strategy 4.3), lower the food quality 
(Strategy 2.3) and limit consumers' rights. Different food industries have different degree of 
concentration and receive different incentives and subsidies from the Government. The structure and 
concentration of the various food sub-sectors vary and are essential parameters that need to be 
monitored. Ensuring transparency and fairness in the attribution of public contracts and procurement in 
general is also needed for an orderly market. Finally, with regard to foodgrain markets, the Government 
needs to continue stabilising prices through its Open Market Sales (OMS). 
Action Agenda 
In line with the PP2041 and the desired "enhanced public sector role in (...) strengthened competition 
policies in a largely deregulated market economy": 
 
* Ibid. 
6 Pood Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU).2020. Op, cit 
"? WIPO, 2020. Global Innovation Index 
TM Geneml Economics Division. 2020. Perspective Pian of Bangladesh 2021-2041. Bangladesh Planning Commission. Ministry 
of Planning, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh

1. Conduct an ecosystem analysis to assess and monitor the degree of competition and 
potential dominant positions in strategic agro sub-sectors 
"To prevent, control and eradicate collusion, monopoly, oligopoly or abuse of dominant position or 
any competitive practices in the market", the Bangladesh Competition Commission® was established 
in 2012 but has yet to become fully operational. With the goal of strengthening competition by ensuring 
access opportunities to newcomers, the ecosystem analysis aims to measure the competition intensity 
and product differentiation and to assess the need and opportunity to grant property right protection. It 
will include the analysis of sectoral entry barriers by their category: legal (patents/licenses), technical 
(high start-up, transaction costs, investment costs; monopoly; technical knowledge); strategic 
(predatory pricing/ first mover/incumbent positioning); brand loyalty. This will constitute a benchmark 
for future reference for the Bangladesh Compctition Commission and the National Council for 
Intellectual Property (NCIP) and its monitoring will be under the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Commerce (MoC) in collaboration with the Ministry of Industries (MoInd), MoA, and the Department of 
Agricultural Marketing (DAM). The ecosystem analysis should be regularly performed to identify 
reforms needed to ensure adequate competition within food sectors. 
2. Operationalise the Bangladesh Competition Commission, in particular for the agro -food 
sector and subsectors 
Sector-specific guidelines will be established to ensure competition and adequate regulatory 
mechanisms (e.g., procurement system or the restructuring of some inefficient sectors such as sugar 
production). The Commission should be equipped with adequate human and financial resources. The 
68% projected increase in its budget over the period 2017-18 to 2021-22 is trivial compared to a four- 
fold increase in the MoC budget. The Commission must be independent and publicly funded and 
international institutions may provide technical support. 
 
3. Operationalise the National Innovation and Intellectual Property Right Policy in 
particular for the food industry 
In line with the PP2041 which stresses that "the current degree of innovation in developing countries 
is low due to poor protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights" and with the goal of the 
National Innovation and Intellectual Property Rights Policy (NIIPRP, 2018) to "Create /ntellectual 
Property and derive economics and commercial benefits from its use",the NCIP will be made 
responsible for facilitating policy coherence between the NIIPRP and the relevant national and sectoral 
development policies. In particular, NCIP will need to closely collaborate with the MoC, MoA, the 
Department of Patents, Designs and Trademarks of the Molnd, and the Bangladesh Competition 
Commission, to ensure innovation and technological adoption within the agri-food industry. A roadmap 
will be developed to ensure policy implementation, monitoring and adequate financing. Key sector 
specific indicators will be developed accordingly once this roadmap is developed. To this end, 
comparative reviews, field research, surveys and interviews aimed at understanding stakeholders' 
perceptions of the various policy options available under the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement will need to be carried out. 
 
4. Continue strengthening the public procurement system" | 
Bangladesh boasts a robust public procurement system regulated by the Public Procurement Act 2006 
and the Public Procurement Rules 2008. A nodal agency, the Central Procurement Technical Unit, under 
the Implementation Monitoring and Evaluation Division (IMED), has also been established. The last 
decade saw a sizeable drive, in capacity development of procurement officials and bidders and the entire 
procurement process has been brought online. However, in order to ensure transparency and 
accountability in public contracts and fairmess in the selection process of participants in government or 
 
*? Bangladesh Competition Commission 
TM See World Bank. 2020, Bangladesh Assessment of Bangladesh Public Procurement System. Governance Global Practice, 
South Asia Region 
es 33 |!

public purchases, these efforts need to continue. For example, the legal framework needs to be assessed 
against an internationally accepted benchmark and monitoring of the application of the rules 
strengthened. 
 
5. Update and enforce the Agricultural Produce Markets Regulation . Act 
The Agricultural Produce Markets Regulation Act (1964), amended in 1985, empowers DAM to issue 
licenses to market officials to operate in a notified market, Under this Act, district level Market 
Advisory Committees regulate market practices and fix market charges for different kinds of 
agricultural produce; they also maintain a set of standard weights and measures; and they undertake 
arbitration in respect of disputes between purchasers and sellers. The Act needs to be amended to handle 
current unethical practices of market functionaries. 
 
 
 
6.Improve the operation of public stocks, procurement and management for price 
_ stabilisation 
The Government uses public food stock acquired through public procurement to intervene in the market 
for price stabilization ensuring that prices are high enough for producers but low enough for consumers. 
Managing the procurement process and ensuring that there is adequate storage space needs to be ensured 
in such a way that potential distortionary effects on the grain market are minimised. Developing PPPs 
to this effect may be considered, Food stock acquisition by the Government also serves Public Food 
Distribution. Details of the actions proposed here are therefore given in Strategy 4.1, 
 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 2,1.2.; 2.2.4.; 2.2,5.; NFNSP Strategies 2.3.; 4.1; 4.3. 
* PP204] 
e NIIPRP, 2018 
Aol 2.1.4, Ensure trade liberalisation and facilitation to support the supply of quality food at all 
times 
Rationale 
Access to food is achieved by ensuring that food products are physically and economically accessible 
to consumers. This implies short-term actions aiming at alleviating sudden shortfalls in domestic 
production and long-term provision of food and productive inputs (such as seeds, fertilisers and 
machineries) "structurally" lacking in the national production systems via imports. Strategies to ensure 
economic access include preserving the purchasing power of the poorest and most vulnerable and can 
be supported by stabilizing food prices (see Aol 2.1.3 and Strategy 4.1) and by incentivizing food 
exports. In this context, the PP2041 predicts that trade liberalisation will continue, and trade facilitation 
will reduce the cost and increase the speed of trade, This also aims at boosting regional food trade 
among South Asian countries which is currently at around 6.2% of their regional trade'! The 
production of rice has doubled over the last two decades and the recent market liberalisation measures 
enabled private traders to import rice thereby compensating shortfalls in domestic availability. Higher 
yielding maize has gradually replaced wheat production whose imports continue. While 
agricultural trade deregulation and liberalization measures have taken place since the 1990s, 
Bangladesh still lags behind in the trade of seed, fertilisers, machinery and agriculture products 
compared to its regional peers". For instance, it can take up to 150 hours -against a 45-hour regional 
 
" Rahman M., Bari E,, Farin $.M. 2018, Operationalizing the SAARC Food Bank: Issues and Solutions. UNESCAP, November 
TM World Bank, 2019. Enabling the Business of Agriculture 2019. 
ts

average- to obtain mandatory agricultural related documents to be able to trade". Against this backdrop, 
Bangladesh signed the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) on 
29 August 2017. While this is predicted to boost exports by 13% and reduce trade cost by 33% with a 
potential savings of more than 0,7 billion USD per year for Bangladesh, trade liberalisation and 
facilitation efforts to ensure the supply of quality food at all times need to continue. 
Action Agenda 
 
 1. Sustain transparency in trade facilitation in particular for agricultural SME" 
This action aims to: 1. make available import-export related information on the Bangladesh trade 
portal, in particular for agricultural SMEs 2. expedite consultations among stakeholders on new draft 
regulations; 3. inform traders on new regulations before these become effective; 4. ensure timely 
advance ruling on trade TM. 
 
2. Strengthen institutional arrangements and cooperation at national level | 
Operationalization of TFA means simplified paperwork, harmonized customs requirements, goods 
clearance expedition, transit facilitation, customs cooperation and capacity building. This is predicted 
to boost exports by 13% and reduce trade cost by 33% with a potential savings of more than 0.7 billion 
USD per year for Bangladesh". Accordingly, this action -aligned with Strategy 5.5- aims at ensuring 
the necessary support to the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) wing and the Bangladesh Trade and Tariff 
Commission (BTTC) from the national agencies involved at various levels with food trade, including 
the MoC, MoA and Customs authorities. A unit to facilitate and monitor FTA for cereals, cash crops 
and agricultural inputs will be formed/strengthened. 
 
3. Enable paperless trade ] 
This action consists in supporting the simplification and harmonization of trade procedures through 
trade digitalization. It is essential that activities, practices and formalities involved in the collection, 
presentation, communication and processing of data and other information required for the movement 
of goods in international trade are simplified and harmonized to international standards. Trade 
digitalization constitutes an objective that will tremendously benefit trade procedures, untap the national 
export potential and allow to bridge the gap with other countries. To this end, the operationalization of 
the framework agreement on facilitating cross-border paperless trade in Asia and the Pacific, in line 
with the voluntary UN treaty (2016) for Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
(ESCAP) countries, will be ensured"'. 
 
4. Support budget and capacity development of the Ministry of Commerce and other key 
_sestsiass. 
To ensure that MoC and other related institutions, such as FTA wing; BTTC, Customs authorities, are 
technically operational, they will be supported with adequate financial and capacity development 
support. 
 
World Bank. 2020. Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh - Policy and investment Priorities 
* OECD and UNESCAP. 2017. Indicators for Trade Facilitation: A Handbook 
73 "Advance rulings are binding decisions by Customs at the request of the person concemed on specific particulars in relation 
to the intended importation or exportation of goods." For more information: UN, 2012. Trade Facilitation Implementation 
Guide 
** UNESCAP, 2019. How trade facilitation could support Bangladesh: Beyond LDC Graduation, June 2019. 
" [bid 
es 3s |!

5. Stabilise food trade partnerships with key food exporting countries through foreign trade 
agreements especially within the South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation 
(SAARC) region 
Due to both increasing wages and population growth, internal food demand has steadily risen, with 
national production capacity unable to keep up with internal demand. These trends translated in three- 
fold increase in imports over a 10-year period to 10.7 billion USD in 2017" and in a widened food 
trade deficit for Bangladesh, This action accordingly aims to ensure timely imports to support national 
food access. This entails accurate food price and volume monitoring by the Price Monitoring Cell of 
the MoC and DAM (see also Strategy 5.3), The Government regulates food imports both directly (for 
grains) and indirectly (by facilitating private actors' import operations). To this end, long term 
agreements with key food trade partners, leveraging on regional associations (¢.g., SAARC, ESCAP) 
need to be ensured in order to support stability of trade. 
 
6. Support the operationalization of SAARC Food Bank" | 
To boost food trade and stabilize food access in the South Asia region, the SAARC Food Bank (SFB) 
was established in 2007 to deploy foodgrain reserves into areas in South Asia experiencing food 
emergencies and shortages. However, SFB is faced with various challenges including: inadequate 
volume of reserves, absence of agreed pricing modalities, lack of dedicated funds and information 
sharing*'. This action accordingly aims at stabilizing availability and food access and consists of the 
following interventions: |. Support evidence-based policy amendments: evidence showed that the 
threshold criteria of 8 percent admissible production shortfall to receive support from SFB prevented 
member countries to obtain support. The decision to remove the criteria was therefore a good 
achievement and similar measures will be taken; 2. Enhance regional trade will increase the access to 
food in SAARC member countries with less pressure on the SFB; 3. Revised Pricing strategy should 
include "deferred payment"; 4. Need for additional provision to SFB. 5. New institutional and 
distribution mechanisms; 6. Ensure political commitment. 
 
| 7.Optimise export support policies based on FVC comparative advantage and specialisation 
Food and beverage exports have intensified in recent years to BDT 112,119 million in 2019, - up by 
62% from 2015, with the fish, crustacean and other aquatic products holding the largest albeit shrinking 
share*', However, there is much scope for improvement to sustain exports. Despite the government 
commitment to support exports, the related subsidy -providing 20% free on-board value-has not yet 
fully translated into improved exports. For instance, potato exports have fallen sharply in the last five 
years due to both price and quality competition. This has demonstrated the need to repurpose the export 
subsidy. Moreover, nine cash crops (jute, rapeseed, garlic, sesame, cotton, fish, spices, tobacco and 
spinach) show promising prospects in terms of export competitiveness - measured according to their 
revealed comparative advantage". For instance, Bangladesh is the eighth largest mango producer in the 
world, which makes expanding exports of mango and related processed products, viable and potentially 
profitable. Other market niches such as beckeeping and fruit processing (c.g., fruit leather) may be 
considered. Careful monitoring of the ongoing supportive measures to the export sectors should be 
performed and adjusted based on the sub-sectors' needs (in line with Strategy 2.3). A review of the 
competitiveness and performance of export-oriented food sectors and generation of the revealed 
comparative advantage for the nine cash crops will be performed regularly to ensure adequacy of the 
 
TM World Bank, 2020. Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh - Policy and Investment Priorities 
*? Rahman M., Bari E., Farin S.M. 2018, Operstionalizing the SAARC Food Bank: Issues and Solutions. UNESCAP, November 
8° hid. 
" Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU). 2020. Op. cit 
* World Bank, 2020. Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh - Policy and Investment Priorities 
" The revealed comparative advantage provides o measure of the net competitive performance (as it excludes subsidies), 
so

policy instruments in place. A similar monitoring system will be applied to import substitution practices 
when possible and appropriate. Trade liberalisation would benefit export-oriented sectors while import- 
competing activities are likely to suffer from it. This needs to be carefully assessed and a mechanism to 
compensate the "losers" of food trade liberalisation implemented, 
Cross references 
e NENSP Strategy 2.3; 4.1; 5.3; 5.5; Aol 2.1.3 
Strategy 2.2 Improve value chain and marketing systems 
Aol 2.2.1. Stimulate innovation-led efficiency gains in food value chains by shortening the chain, 
improving cooperation among agents, and by reducing food losses and waste 
Rationale 
Innovation-led productivity growth represents a core strategy to achieve the PP2041 targets in all 
sectors, including agro-processing. Although very broad in its scope, four main components of this 
approach are": research and education, business and enterprises (Strategy 2.2), bridging institutions 
(Strategy 5.5) and the enabling environment (Ao! 2.2.3), which includes securing property rights and 
promoting competition (Aol 2.1.3) and incentivizing the role of private investments, for instance 
through innovation hubs and PPPs (Aol 2.3.3). Innovation is a process. As such, it includes multiple 
actors and requires their cooperation which often results in the transfer of know-how and the formation 
of human capital. However, in Bangladesh, the lack of well-established processors, formal distributors 
or exporters still limit knowledge transfer and high-quality standards in agro-food markets." Moreover, 
FVC distribution and marketing are mainly informal with the associated challenges of inadequate 
infrastructure (Aol 2.1.1) and lack of quality and food safety standard enforcement (Aol 5.1.1)". The 
fragmented structure of FVCs - except for maize - is also responsible for high transaction costs for 
farmers and high levels of food loss, food safety issues and reduced investments. Moreover, the lack of 
a digital payment system at each value chain stage hinders accountability and traceability and the 
access Of MSMEs to finance (Aol 2.1.2), which enables innovation and risk taking. Lack of innovation 
in shortening the value chain and limited cooperation among agents are also impediments to guarantee 
the availability of safe and nutritious foods. 
Action Agenda 
'1. Promote the adoption of digital invoices and value chain | inventory management | eee ee. -- ec 
 
 
The adoption of a technological platform hosting digital invoices and order maintenance can bring 
efficiency gains in FVCs"'. These innovative technologies - including the government-prescribed 
Electronic Cash Register and Point of Sale - the automatic sale system - may also stimulate tax revenue 
gencration by promoting a Value Added Tax (VAT) automation process, Accordingly, Electronic Fiscal 
Devices was tobe mainstreamed by the National Board of Revenue, starting with the installation of 10,000 
of them by June 2021, and progressively replacing traditional cash registers". 
2. Promote innovative solutions to shorten food value chains | 
The shortening of FVCs, especially for perishable foods, will be promoted by incentivizing the formal 
distribution channels through the registration of the value chain actors. Supporting contract farming 
 
" FAO's work on agricultural innovation - Sowing the seeds of transformation to achieve the SDGs (2018) 
* World Bank. 2020, Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh: Policy and Investment Priorities. 
© fhid, 
*' World Bank, 2019. Financing solutions for micro, small and medium enterprises in Bangladesh 
* Dhaka Tribune. 2020, Govt to put its foot down on collecting VAT 
" Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU). 2020. Op. cit 
es 37 i!

and the establishment of produce comers in markets (including organic produce) may also contribute 
to reducing the number of FVC actors and will be therefore incentivized. Besides, the enforcement of 
food safety standards will be strengthened and accompanied by consumer awareness and sensitization 
campaigns (Aol 5.1.3). Both initiatives will in turn contribute to promote formal distribution channels 
as a safer option for consumers and a more profitable option for FVC agents, over the informal channels. 
Initiatives that support information sharing among farmers and vertical and horizontal integration 
among value chain actors thereby contributing to shorten FVCs, will also be encouraged". 
 
3. Strengthen the linkages among FVC agents | 
This action will be ensured by leveraging on the promotion of inclusive cooperative/group-based 
production (Ao! 1.1.9), processing and marketing (Aol 2.2.4). Introducing modern post-harvest 
technologies, especially refrigerated transport vehicles, low temperature storage, modern 
slaughterhouse, improved packaging, ethylene-induced mpening chamber, will support FVC efficiency 
gains when associated with strong linkages among the FVC agents*'. Encouraging cooperative/ group- 
based establishment of these innovative solutions to the FVC will help efficiency gains in the market. 
 
 4. Promote innovative solution for reducing food loss and waste | 
See Strategy 5.2. 
 
'5._Promote innovative solution for packaging and storage (see Aol 2.3.1) 1 as a es + ee -_--- _ - - a 
Packaging and storage services in FVCs are often poor and inadequate which creates higher costs for 
agents along the chain. Private sector initiatives such as PRAN providing packaging (plastic crates) and 
traceability services (providing farmer's name on the label) for their mango products, should be 
promoted and incentivized". Improving the packaging and transportation services is essential for FVC 
efficiency gains (NAP PoA 2020 Aol 2.1.5.). Large-scale food processors are in the frontline for 
innovating smart packaging, ranging from technologies for reduced contamination, to biodegradability 
and sustainability. These innovations need to be scaled up in line with food safety standards and 
regulations" and the Bangladesh Food Safety Authority (BFSA) Packaged Food Labelling Regulations 
2017, and leveraged with adequate research to ensure scalability. 
Cross references 
* NEFNSP POA: Aol 1.1.9; 2.1.1; 2.1.2; 2.1.3; 2.2.3; 2.2.4; 2.3.1; 5.1.1; 5.1.3; Strategy 5.2. 
* NAP PoA 2020: Aol 2.1.5 Improvement in Packaging and Transformation 
Aol 2.2.2, Encourage and support the establishment and growth of financially viable MSMEs 
Rationale 
Micro and small enterprises (MSEs) constitute the large majority of non-farm businesses in Bangladesh. 
The World Bank Enterprise Survey (2013) ranks the top-three obstacles for MSMEs as follows: political 
instability, electricity (Aol 2.2.3) and access to finance (Aol 1.1.4 and 2.1.2), While the creation of an 
enabling environment is essential (Aol 2.2.3), this Aol deals with effective ways to respond to the 
growing request for MSMEs' financial and technical support and to adopt energy-efficient and 
environmentally sustainable technology in agro-food processing. The CGAP profilingTM defined various 
smallholder farming groups (see Aol 1.1.4). A similar profiling could be useful for MSMEs, from 
 
® Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), 2020, Op. cit 
*! Ibid. 
*® World Bank. 2019. Financing solutions for micro, smal! and medium enterprises in Bangladesh 
" BFSA (2019) BFSA Food Contact Materials Regulations 2019 
* Anderson J., Moler A. & Kretchun N. (2016) Op. cit. 
il? ay

subsistence to more advanced and entrepreneurial firms, to ensure that adequate support is provided 
based on their status of business model, development, technology, level of capitalisation, sector 
(transformation, distribution, marketing), current challenges and market volumes, The agro-processing 
MSMEs profiling could emerge from the Enterprise Survey. Agro-processing is recognised as the main 
source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to rice production and animal husbandry. In line with 
the green growth strategy depicted in the PP2041, facilitating access to energy-efficient technology 
through a preferential line of credit (see Aol 2.1.2), the provision of technical support on energy 
efficiency, and the inclusion of energy efficient technology adoption in the cligibility criteria to access 
financing, are key aspects to support the growth of MSMEs. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Regularly perform Enterprise Surveys (in line with Aol 2.2.3) 
The last Enterprise Survey produced by the World Bank Group was in 2013. It may be therefore no 
longer closely reflect the needs of MSMEs in a rapidly changing context, exacerbated by the COVID- 
19 pandemic. The World Bank Enterprise Survey is an excellent benchmark which includes 12 topics". 
The survey will be expanded under the leadership of BBS and the Molnd to include a topic on 
environment and sustainability and the CGAP Smallholder Household Surveys subgrouping, and 
profiling by sub-sectors and by sub-region may be used. This improved design will constitute a solid 
reference to provide data-driven, tailor made solutions for MSMEs in Bangladesh. 
 
'2. Design tailored-made financial, technical and managerial support based on the enterprise 
profiling and surveys 
Enterprise Surveys will help provide targeted support to different groups. This will include peer to peer 
exchange among different profiles of MSMEs aiming to facilitate graduation of firms from a lower to 
a higher profile, This action will be made easier by leveraging on the promotion of inclusive 
cooperative/group-based processing and marketing (Aol 2.2.4), and on the establishment of frameworks 
for national and subnational FNS stakeholder partnerships (Aol 5.5.4). Continued technical support 
from DPs when necessary and the Green Climate Fund (GCF), will be tapped into. 
 
3. Promote private sector investment in agro-food processing through large scale adoption 
__of energy saving technology and equipment 
The current GCF Country Programme for Bangladesh" presents the country's priorities on climate 
change as set in 2018, under the coordination of the Economic Relations Division (ERD), Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) which is the National Designated Authority (NDA) to manage the GCF. The GCF 
country portfolio may be expanded to include agro-processing in line with PP2041. An integral package 
of concessional financing for agro-processing and technical assistance to make agro-processing resilient 
to climate change will be designed with adequate technical assistance and submitted to the GCF for 
funding and will subsequently be implemented under the coordination of MoInd and MoEFCC and the 
support of the MoFL in close coordination with the NDA. The ultimate objective of the programme will 
be to promote agro-processing while abating GHG emissions - measured in terms of carbon dioxide 
equivalent, particularly in the livestock sector, and for women-led entrepreneurships. To reach that 
objective, it will be essential to update the GHG inventory. Essential elements of the programme design 
will be capacity building, awareness raising, policy development and support in loan disbursal, as well 
as monitoring and cyaluation of the programme targets. 
 
5 Biggest obstacle, corruption, crime, finance, firm characteristics, gender, informality, infrastructure, performance, regulation 
and taxes, trade, workforce. 
** NDA Sceretariat. 2018. Journcy with Green Climate Fund Bangladesh's Country Programme for Green Climate Fund. 
Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh 
es 39 I!

Cross references 
« NFPSP PoA Aol 1.1.4.; 2.1.2.; 2.2.3; 2.2.4; 5.5.4. 
« PP2041 
Aol 2.2.3. Create an enabling environment to attract private investment in infrastructure, 
processing, value addition, marketing and eliminate business barriers 
Rationale 
The PP2041 foresees an agricultural transition towards highly productive, modern, diversified and 
climate-resilient agriculture, driven by a sustained demand for nutritious and safe foods both 
domestically and internationally. The private sector's role is essential for sustained investment in food 
processing, transformation and marketing. To ensure the profitability and positive socio-economic 
impact of private investments, a necessary condition is the creation of an enabling environment whereby 
the following are provided: a favourable FNS investment, regulatory (Aol 2.1.3), policy and legislative 
environment, including on food safety (Aol 5.1.1); a set of public goods, such as large infrastructure 
and networks; reliable access to energy, data and information (Strategy 5.3); technical education and 
vocational training (Aol 2.4.1), This is closely linked with food trade liberalisation and creating 
opportunities for agro-food exporting subsectors (Aol 2.1.4). Policies and incentives that support agro- 
food businesses already exist: for instance, the Agro-Food Processing Promotion Policy 2019 with a 
20% cash incentive and tax exemption for selected fresh and processed food exports. However, 
adequate private investments and certainty in the policy and regulatory environment requires closer 
dialogue between the private and public actors (Aol 5.5.3). A viable solution shown to be effective by 
the Ready-Made Garment industry is the establishment of Special Economic Zones (SEZ) which are to 
be set up for agro processing (Aol 2.3.3), The improvement of food safety regulatory standards is also 
essential to ensure food safety and compliance importing countries' legislations. As a member of the 
Nationally Determined Contributions partnership and with one of the fastest growing power sectors in 
South Asia, Bangladesh is committed to achieving universal access to affordable and clear electricity, 
However, as of 2018, 22% of the rural population still had no access to electricity. Reliable access to 
energy represents a major bottleneck with less than 80% power generation capacity operational with 
frequent scheduled blackouts. 
Action Agenda 
, Establish a favourable policy and technical support to incentivise investment in food 
processing 
While Bangladesh policy making is not new to the inclusion of relevant private actors, this will be made 
more demand-driven and tailormade to the needs of the private sector. Enterprise surveys will be 
regularly conducted to ensure that the policy makers" agenda adapts to MSMEs* evolving needs. 
Moreover the GCF will be tapped in to ensure that an integral package of concessional financing is 
provided to agro-processing (Aol 2.2.2). Strong PPPs for coordinated investments, technical support 
and enabling policies will be essential. It is essential for instance to agree on mutual expectations and 
commitments which need to be translated into action. To make this action achievable, local governance 
will be strengthened and empowered (Aol 5.5.2) as local authorities are key enablers to ensure the 
balance between private investment and socio-economic development in rural areas. Transparency and 
anti-corruption policies and actions will be implemented. 
 
ee

2. Provide synergetic public goods such as infrastructure, data and information 4 
The existence of plans to construct or strengthen infrastructural networks may be a key driver for private 
investment's decisions, For instance, the FAO Hand-in-hand initiative"' (Aol 5.3.1) will be leveraged 
to ensure synergetic Interaction and matchmaking between actors such as the ADB and the Local 
Government Engineering Department (LGED) to strengthen large scale infrastructures (Aol 2.1.1), 
international donors to improve socio-economic conditions of marginalized groups in rural areas and 
private sector investments on a whole specific value chain which present export comparative advantages 
(Aol 2.1.64). To facilitate cconomy of scope and scale, SEZ for agro-processing will be established 
(Aof 2.3.3). 
 
3. Ensure power generation capacity 
Power generation represents 4 main constraint in rural areas and for agro-processing. Electrical outages 
can reach 80 times per month and last up to five hours for firms, This is particularly harmful for food 
preservation and for ensuring food quality and cold chain maintenance, The Bangladesh Power 
Development Board (BPDB) will address the surge in power demand and adjust the energy mix for 
ensuring long-term energy security by strengthening the preparation of power system master plans. This 
will be done with particular emphasis on exploiting synergies with the GCF (Aol 2.2.2), 
Cross references 
¢ NFNSP PoA Aol 2.1.1; 2.1.3; 2.1.4; 2.2.2; 2.3.3; 2.4.1; 5.1.1; 5.3.1; 5.5.2; 5.5.3. 
NFNSP PoA Strategy 5.3. Improve data, information and analysis for evidence-based planning, 
monitoring, evaluation, and update of policies and programs through wider partnerships 
Aol 2.2.4. Promote inclusive cooperative/group-based processing and marketing 
Rationale 
While cooperatives" and group-based associations still play a limited role in Bangladesh, their 
promotion and strengthening can be beneficial for farmers (Aol 1.1.9), the other actors working along 
the FVC and their communities. Agro-food processing in Bangladesh is largely constituted by MSEs, 
with two to five employees, and only one in 30% of the cases. The majority of them are informal 
entities. This translates into limited access to inputs, technology, finance, know-how, information 
(including on food safety standards and practice) and markets. Against this backdrop, group-based and 
cooperative Input management, technical assistance and commercial logistic management can offer 
economies of scale in processing and marketing, thereby increasing competitiveness and profitability, 
especially for MSEs. Institutional support from the Government, adequate financial intermediaries, 
apex supervision bodies are necessary for cooperative or group-based food processing and marketing 
to develop and thrive. However, in order to receive a "special treatment", the comparative advantage of 
the cooperative/group-based systems should be also demonstrated. However, the cooperative/group- 
based modalities are not yet fully known and understood along with their positive socio-economic long- 
term impacts for group members and their communities. 
 
%? Using the most sophisticated tools available, including advanced geo-spatial modeling and analytics, Hand-in-Hand 
identifies the biggest opportunilics to raise the incomes and reduce the inequities and vulnerabilities of the rural poor, who 
constitute the vast majority of the world's poor. It uses these tools to understand a comprehensive view of full economic 
opportunities and to improve targeting and tailoring of policy interventions, innovation, finance and investment, and 
institutional reform accordingly. 
" "Coopemtives are based on values of self-help, self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity and solidarity, While 
cooperatives are ulso businesses, the main objectives for people to set up or join a cooperative is to improve their economic 
and social conditions through joint ection for the good of all members rather than through individual concerns only" (FAO, 
1998. Agricultural Development Cooperatives - A Manual for Trainers) 
es 4 ||

Action Agenda 
 
1. Enhance political commitment and local level institutional support in cooperative/ group- 
based food processing 
While Bangladesh is actively promoting the role of the private sector in FNS, there has not been 
adequate attention and thinking the potential role of cooperatives. There is a need to update the 
Cooperative Policy 2012 to provide a clear vision on the value added of cooperative systems for the 
members and their communities compared to comparable private endeavours. Besides, for the 
establishment of the cooperatives, it is essential to have institutional support from the local government 
(Aol 5.5.2), along with implementation of transparency and anti-corruption measures. 
 
| 2. Assess the comparative advantage of the cooperative system in Bangladesh | 
From other countries' experiences, cooperatives provide more employment compared to private 
companies generating the same level of revenue". As the cooperative model remains relatively 
underdeveloped in Bangladesh and it will be essential to assess and demonstrate its comparative 
advantage compared to the private sector. Processing and marketing cooperatives may be integrated 
into the Enterprises Surveys (Aol 2.2.2) to be able to compare their performance (in terms of economic 
and social benefits) with similar traditional private enterprises. 
 
3. Integrate cooperative-related sensitisation activities in community development projects 
| 
The cooperative system has shown to be successful when membership is voluntary and open, the control 
democratic, the benefits produced for the members and their community and when decision making 
follows a bottom-up approach, It will be therefore essential to sensitise communities, including 
women's groups, to the potential value addition of the cooperative system integrating it with other 
entrepreneurial and community development projects and activities. For instance, the MoFL 
Sustainable Coastal and Marine Fisheries Project (2018-2023) may be leveraged (Aol 1.1.7), on 
providing alternative livelihood opportunities to poor fishers. 
 
4. Support financial inclusion of cooperatives/ groups -based processing, marketing and 
access digital services 
Cooperative/ group-based food processing and marketing will receive special attention and dedicated 
lines of credit and financial managerial support (Ao! 2.1.2) as they provide socio-economic benefit to 
members and their communities. Cooperatives should be therefore provided with low-interest 
enterprise loan (Aol 1.1.9). Their access to digital services will also be ensured through the 
implementation of the National ICT Policy 2018". 
Cross references 
@ NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.7; 1.1.9; 2.1.2; 2.2.2.; 5.5.2. 
e NAP PoA 2020: Aol 2.3.3 PPP in Processing and Export 
¢ National ICT Policy 2018 
Aol 2.2.5. Strengthen ICT-based market information system to provide real time support to 
farmers 
Rationale 
Agricultural markets not only perform essential physical marketing functions, such as physical 
distribution and storage of foods, they also provide "signals" on the cost and price of food products to 
 
" CICOPA. 2017, Cooperatives and employment- Second Global Report 2017 
100 ICT Division (2018), National [CT Policy 2018. Government of Bangladesh 
oe

agents operating on the FVC and to final consumers. However, signals and market information are not 
always available uniformly throughout FVCs. Against this backdrop, ICT offers the opportunity to 
provide lower prices and higher quality to consumers while offering a fair and stable price to producers. 
ICT comprehends "any device, tool or application that permits the exchange or collection of data 
through interaction or transmission. It includes from radio to satellite imagery to mobile phones or 
electronic money transfers''"', Since the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, producer organisations 
started virtual call centres with the support of the Missing Middle Initiative (MMI) of the Global 
Agriculture Food Security Program (GAFSP). The call centers demonstrated to be useful to connect 
producers - looking for a way to sell their produce, especially perishables - and consumers via mobile 
orders and payment thereby minimising physical contact. Different technologies such as mobile phones, 
messaging, digital money, online meeting platforms need to be integrated with market information 
systems in support of farmers' decision making and in timely sales. While DAM of the MoA is in charge 
of collecting price data, its staff is inadequately equipped to collect price information to capture price 
volatility at upazila level!TM. 
Action Agenda 
In line with the Access to information in Bangladesh (a2i) initiative and with the Bangladesh Strategic 
Plan of Agriculture and Rural Statistics (SPARS, 2016-2030) Output 4.6 under Goal 4: 
 
1. Strengthen DAM market price data monitoring system through expanded 
organizational structure up to upazila level 
In order to cover real time and upazila level price data, the organizational structure of DAM is to be 
expanded and staff adequately trained to be able to effectively monitor food market prices up to upazila 
level. To this end, a detailed assessment and allocation of the necessary human and financial resources 
will be made. 
 
[2. Improve DAM data collection methodology with BBS support | 
 
| 3. Make the price data monitoring system available, reliable and effective | 
In continuation with the country-level work of FAO with the Food Price Monitoring and Analysis 
(FPMA) tool, a tool needs to be developed to disseminate the price information collected, in 
coordination with existing and effective initiatives (e.g., Grameenphone's GP Krishi Sheba, call 
centre)'TM and international development initiatives (e.g., MMI support to virtual call centres) in support 
of farmers' decision making and income opportunities. According to CGAP national survey of 
smallholder households in Bangladesh, 73% of smallholders own a mobile phone, which makes the 
device useful to obtain real time price information, and improve market transparency, thereby 
facilitating farmers', The main State entities working with agricultural data are BBS, DAE, DAM, 
FPMU, and Directorate General of Food (DG Food) which have developed increasing linkages and 
collaborations with both private partners (Grameenphone, I-farmer) and international partners such as 
the FAO Global Information and Early Warning System (GIEWS), Agricultural Market Information 
System (AMIS), with Bangladeshi and international universities and other international centres. These 
collaborations need to continue and to be strengthened. 
 
'\ World Bank 2017. ICT in Agriculture: Connecting Smallholders to Knowledge, Networks, and Institutions, Updated 
Edition. Washington, DC: Warld Bank. 
'"2 Bangladesh Strategic Plan of Agriculture and Rural Statistics (SPARS, 2016-2030), June 2017. 
'8 Grameenphone website 
4 CGAP. 2017. Understanding the Demand for Financial, Agricultural, and Digital Solutions from Smallholder Houscholds: 
Insights from the Houschold Survey in Bangladesh 
Cross references 
e SPARS, 2016-2030 Output 4.6. Goal 4 Agriculture Price data system of DAM strengthened 
es 43 ||

Strategy 2.3 Preserve and enhance nutrient content along the value chain 
Aol 2.3.1. Preserve and promote food safety and nutrients along the value chain including during 
transportation, processing, packaging, storage, wholesale, and retail 
Rationale 
Food systems are becoming increasingly complex, with foods travelling longer and passing through 
multiple stages from farm to fork. Longer and more complex value chains and markets mean greater 
risks of loss in the nutritional value of food and of its safety being jeopardised. The main food safety 
hazards in Bangladesh include accidental foodborne illness (microbiological, chemical, physical, 
natural, process induced and environmental contamination) and economically driven (adulteration, 
mislabelling, etc.) foodbome hazards. But these new types of value chains also mean additional 
potential entry points to enhance the nutrition sensitivity of value chains through, for example, the use 
of ICTs to plan food supply wisely and adequately, or the expansion of new types of retailing channels 
such as supermarkets which are better than wet markets at keeping food safe, Since foodbome illnesses 
are a significant threat to health, application of safe and hygienic practices in food handling, appropriate 
technologies in postharvest processing, product development and storage are of utmost importance to 
preserve the nutritional quality and ensure food safety. Yet, there has been an increased reporting of 
food safety incidents and hazards by the media, emphasizing the need to sensitise actors of the value 
chain to the importance of food safety and quality. There is an increased market demand around safe 
and nutritious food, however it is not enough to pressurise stakcholders in the value chain to practice 
safe food production/handling/storage processes. There is a need to enable food quality and sanitary 
safety of food products through adherence to food safety legislations, standards, and norms at every 
stage of the supply chain. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Collect evidence on gaps and opportunities to preserve food safety and nutrients along the 
food value chain and implement recommendations 
Evidence needs to be collected to understand where on the FVC safety measures need to be enforced to 
have a safe and sustainable food system, in line with the Food Safety Act 2013. Research can also 
identify the stages of the value chain where nutrients are being lost due to inadequate practices or 
infrastructure and/or where they could be enhanced. A value chain approach may be used explicitly as 
a tool to achieve nutritional goals'*'. So far, the focus of different studies has mostly been on the 
economic benefits of food production, although value chain concepts offer considerable potential for 
enhancing efforts to improve nutritional quality and safety. Understanding the viewpoint of the different 
stakeholders to see how their involvement in optimising value chains for nutrition-sensitive product 
development is required. For example, the underlying objectives and operating principles of the private 
sector may not obviously match the goal of improving nutrition'", creating challenges and barriers to 
designing and implementing NSVC: this needs to be resolved since there is a clear role for the private 
sector in integrating nutrition considerations into value chains'"'. Once evidence is made available on 
these issues, recommendations should be implemented. 
 
'S Hawkes, C, & Rucl M.T, 2011. Value Chains for Nutrition, Prepared for the IFPRI 2020 Paper for the international 
conference "Leveraging Agriculture for Improving Nutrition and Health" February 10-12, New Delhi, India 
'% SUN (2011) Private Sector Engagement Toolkit 
'? Downs, S. & J. Fanzo. 2016, Managing Value Chains for Improved Nutrition in Kraemer K, Cordaro JB, Fanzo J, Gibney 
M, Kennedy B, Labrique A. & Steffen J. Good Nutrition: Perspectives for the 21st Century

2. Sensitise stakeholders of the value chain to food safety and nutrition (in line with NPAN2 
Key Action Area 6.2.5 and 6.5.8) 
Food producers and agribusinesses must be sensitised on the importance of preserving the nutritional 
value of food and when possible, enhancing it, as well to food safety issues. Strengthening value chains 
for promoting local, micronutrient rich foods, producing foods with fewer chemicals and compliance 
to nutritional standards for food products are important considerations. Promoting the processing of 
local fruits such as mangoes and litchis is one such example. Incentives to comply with existing 
standards must be created and/or flagged to those concerned. For example, compliance to international 
standards and alignment with global market requirements may open up export markets and in turn 
increase productivity, The flow of information among participants in the supply chain is also important, 
as well as product management, in order to maintain the food quality in the supply chain. Sensitization 
of consumers on these issues (see Aol 3.2.2 and 5.1.3) will translate into greater demand for safe and 
nutritious foods. 
 
Food contaminated with pathogenic bacteria may look, smell, and taste normal but if food is not stored 
properly, the bacteria (pathogens) in it can grow and multiply to dangerous levels. To combat these 
issues, there is a dire need to establish and ensure sufficient and efficient food storage facilities, 
including cold storage (see Aol 2.1.1.), Commercial and public storage facilities need to be regularly 
audited and the facilities need to follow the standards set by BFSA. This includes safe storage of food 
distributed as part of the Public Food Distribution System (see Aol 4.1.3). Any noncompliance will lead 
to strict actions against the defaulters. Safe storage with appropnate temperature controls must be 
ensured at all stages of the value chain: in farms, processors, wholesalers and retailers, and even 
consumers (see Aol 3.2.1. and 5.1.3), 
 
 
'4. Encourage safe food facilities and outlets selling certified food | 
In order to build consumer confidence and awareness, the MoFood needs to encourage building more 
safe food facilities and outlets selling certified food, Shwapno, the supermarket in Dhaka started one 
such initiative, Shuddho, under which they ensure that only safe food chemicals such as additives, 
food colours, and preservatives are used in the whole process. They require documentation on the 
application of permitted chemicals used on the produce, on the agriculture process, from seeding to 
application of pesticides to harvesting. Such initiatives should be expanded. Food manufacturers and 
sellers must be responsible and judiciously use chemicals within specified limits and standards, given 
the related exposure risks. 
'5. Strengthen food product certification and nutrition labelling for assuring quality and 
safety 
BFSA needs to enhance food safety enforcement through harmonization of its food product certification 
with Codex standards and in compliance with Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institution (BST) 
guidelines. The technical team should periodically review the certifications of food products and food 
establishments, Imported foods also need to be certified. Appropriate nutrient labelling and product 
information must be available on the food product to guide the consumer in food selection, The nutrition 
information must be consistent with legal requirements, dietary recommendations, and harmonized 
with guidance from the Codex Guidelines on food labelling. The food producer or manufacturer needs 
to be provided with a platform where they can consult for their concerns and issues regarding 
certification and labelling, such as a hotline to collect their grievances and share information. 
 
Cross references 
© NFNSP Aol 2.1.1.; 3.2.1.5 3.2.3; 4.1.3.5 5.1.3. 
e NPAN PoA 6.2.5 Key Action Areas: Promoting/Enforcing measures to ensure regulations of 
production' processing/marketing/ preservation of food items; Increasing knowledge and 
as 4s ||

improving prictices to ensure food safety ulong the value chuin; 6.5.8: Key Action Areas: 
Strengthening the enforcement of Food Safety Act 2013; Enhancing public awareness on food 
saicty, 
Aol 2.3.2, Promote the fortification and nutrition cnhancement of relevant foods where desirable 
and efficient 
Rationale 
Advances made in biofortification are still limited (see Aol 1.1.1.) and cannot singlchandedly address 
the existing nutritional geps that affect the Bangladeshi population. Scaling up fortification of staple 
foods such as rice with essential micronutrients, although not an alternative to improving nutrition 
through the consumption of nutritionally adequate diversificd dicts, is a supportive and efficient 
intervention that can go a long way towards solving micronutrient deficiency. It has been prioritized in 
the National Strategy on Prevention and Controt of Micronutrient Deficiencies 2015-2024 (NSPCMD) 
and the NPAN2 (2016-2025) and the CIP2 (2016-2020). The National Edibie Oil Fortification Law: 
2013 has led to 100% of refined edible oil to be fortified with vitamin A'TM. While overall coverage 
across the country has certainly increased, worse off households and rural households are less likely to 
consume-such oil, and whee they do, do sa in lesser quantities. It is suggested it may be due to lesser 
availability in poorer areas and higher cost, where there is preference for home or locally produced oil 
due to cultural influences. However, locally produced mustard oil is now more expensive given the 
labor intensive technologies, Rice fortification with vitamins A, B1 snd B12, zing, folic acid , and iron, 
has been well accepted and integrated in government social safety net programmes. But particular 
attention needs to be given to identifying potential barriers to equitable access for all population groups 
needing adequately iodine fortified salt. On the whole, outreach, coverage and access to fortified foods 
by targeted populations remain inadequate and needs to' be tackled. 
Action Agenda 
1. Callect data to inform policy | Understanding the state of current consumption of adequately fortified foods is essential for this 
Aol to be fruitful. For example, the last national survey on the consumption of adequately iodised salt 
dates from 2015, Regular assessment of the distribution of key micronutrient deficiencies across regions 
and population groups is required to inform policy. 
_ 2. Monitor existing endeavours and apply existing roles 
Because Bangiadesh already features a number of food fortification programmes, it is important to take 
'stovk of the sitaation-in order to be able to adjust them to the needs (as identified from the activity 
described above), and expand them accordingly (as described below), Compliance of the private sector 
to the existing laws and notably on vitamin A fortification will need to be reinforced (see Strategic Area 
6 of the NSPCMD). The quality of fortified foods will need to be checked For this, the capacity of the 
relevant institutes will need to be strengthened as advocated by the NSPCMD. 
"3. Adjust, expand and scale up existing programmes: 
Based on the knowledge acquired through relevant monitoring activities (see aboye), the outreach, 
coverage and access to fortified foods by targeted populations will be expanded through adequate 
programmes (in line with NPAN2 Strategic Action 6.2.8 and Strategic Objective 4 of the National Plan 
of Action for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030). This will be the case for:cxample of the universal 
galt iodisation programme and the fortification of edible oil with Vitamin. A2. Expansion will also 
 
 
 
 
105 Raghavan R., Aaron GJ, Nahar B,, et al. 2019, Household coverage of vitamin A fortification of edib}e oil in Bangladesh, 
PLoS One, 2019; [4(4 pc t2287,

involve reaching groups with specific needs and/or deficiencies in particular nutrients. For this, the 
distribution of fortified foods through safety nets (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.7) will be 
expanded with efforts to introduce additional more fortified foods into the food basket of safety nets 
than is currently included (see Aol 4.3.3 which aims to develop and implement appropriate nutrition- 
sensitive social protection programs, including food fortification, targeted at nutritionally vulnerable 
groups especially mother and children). 
4. Devise and deploy new programmes to respond to the needs identified 
Strategic Area 2 of the NSPCMD recommends new fortification programmes such as adding vitamin 
D in edible oil fortification. Experiences from other countries and research will help devise other 
fortification programmes to complement what is currently taking place. The range of fortified foods 
available may be expanded, taking into account factors such as acceptability (taste, smell and colour 
may be affected by fortification) and interactions between micronutrients added and the fact that poorer 
rural houscholds tend to consume only a limited quantity of subsistence foods, limiting the scope for 
fortification. There is also scope for developing techniques to improve the bioavailability of nutrients 
such as the germination and malting of grains and legumes for example, or promoting the use of the 
beta carotene-rich orange fleshed sweet potato in foods for children and adolescents, as ways to enrich 
foods. The nutritional value of foods may also be enhanced by food-to-food enrichment as in the case 
of complementary foods for infants and young children. Dried fish and chicken or beef liver blends or 
chips'", incorporating orange fleshed sweet potato with coconut, chickpea flour and local molasses in 
halua for an intermediate shelf-life product, or dried small fish powder''', are some notable examples 
with evidence from the field'''. Such technologies and products need to be widely tested and taken to 
scale through FNS and rural poverty alleviation programmes. 
| 5. Promote the sale and use of fortified foods and advocate for their use | 
Measures are needed to encourage the retail sector to sell fortified products at affordable prices and to 
promote their consumption by all segments of the population through marketing campaigns (as 
promoted by Strategic Area 5 of the NSPCMD and in line with Strategic Objective 4 of the National 
PoA for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030). Fortified foods will need to be integrated with other 
health programmes to create greater demand. 
 
6. Prevent loss of nutrients while processing foods 
Finally, notwithstanding the possibility of fortifying foods, improving their bioavailability, or enriching 
them, attention must be taken to prevent the loss of nutrients in the processing of foods. Milling and 
excessive polishing of grains for example, loses a significant part of their nutrients. Processing of 
different rice products such as in the preparation of puffed rice and rice flakes from hybrid rice or 
traditional parboiled rice will help conserve B complex vitamins and provide convenience in the use of 
the product. Similarly, processing technologies of horticulture, tubers and other crops'"* will need to be 
reviewed to identify where losses are taking place and how they can be reduced (see Aol 2.2.1 and 
5.2.2. in this respect). 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.1.; 2.2.1.5 4.3.3; 5.2.2. 
 
' Wusantwisut E, Chittchang U. & Sinawat S. 2000. Moving a health system from o medical towards » dietary approach in 
Thailand. Fd Nutr Bull. 21(2):; 157-160 
'°www,worldfishcenter.org. 6 aquatic food system innovations transforming women's livelihoods 
't! Saha, M, Mannan A, Bhattacharjee L. 2016. Mainstreaming Nutrition into Agricultural Extension: Lessons Leamed from 
Two Projects that Integrated Agricultural Interventions and Nutrition in Bangladesh, Feed the Future, Integrating Gender and 
Nutrition within Agricultural Extension, INGENAES, and FAO 
'? Hassan K et al. 2010. Post Harvest Loss Assessment: A Study to Formulate Policy for Loss Reduction of Fruits and 
Vegetables and Socioeconomic Uplift of the Stakeholders, BAU/FPMU/FAO 
es 47 I!

® NSPCMD 2015-2024: Strategic Areas 2: Micronutrient Intervention Programmes; Strategic 
Area 5: Advocacy and Communication; 6: Monitoring, Evaluation and Research 
e NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.7. Providing nutritionally enriched supplementary food in 
response to emergency and severe food insecurity; Strategic Action 6.2.8: Initiate a food 
fortification programme and expand its use and perimeter. 
¢ Strategic Objective 4 of the National Plan of Action for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017- 
2030), Key Strategy: Establish programmes that promote dietary diversification, dietary 
adequacy, fortified foods and nutrition security through community and school-based 
interventions 
Aol 2.3.3. Promote innovation and development of appropriate technologies to preserve nutritional 
value in local and export processing zones (EPZs), including under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) 
Rationale 
Nutrients in food need to be preserved along the value chain (see Aol 2.3.1) and innovations and the 
development of the agro-processing industry are key in doing so, The PP2041 mentions various types 
of Economic Zones (EZs) as a means to incentivise industrialization, employment generation, domestic 
and foreign investments, in a variety of productive sectors including high value crop processing. This 
is mainly regulated by the Bangladesh Economic Zones Act (2010)''? amended in 2015 which 
established the Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority (BEZA)- and the Bangladesh Private Economic 
Zones Policy (2015). BEZA's goal is to establish, license, operate, manage and contro! EZs including 
in underdeveloped regions, through increased and diversified industry, employment, production and 
export. The policy framework ensures equal treatment for local and foreign investors and, unlike 
previous Export Processing Zones, promotes linkages with the local economy, and special arrangements 
in environment clearance, labour issues, taxation and customs clearance''*. The 2017 BEZA investors' 
guide to EZs'TM* helps identify, develop and operationalize EZ projects through either PPPs or as private 
projects. There are currently 66 EZs: 55 government owned - including the agro-processing zone in 
Natore and 11 private. Agro-processing EZs can stimulate demand for diversified and nutrient-dense 
raw products and for other productive inputs (machineries and infrastructure) and services (including 
financial, technical support, training, leasing). These can in turn increase demand for efficient road 
and rail infrastructure, health facilities, housing, schools and training facilities. To facilitate private 
sector investment, the government may provide incentives such as easy land leasing system, one-stop 
service for all utility connections, guarantee for loans and tax concessions. The private sector can build 
the infrastructure in exchange for land and basic utilities. The establishment, opcrationalisation and 
mainstreaming of EZs is strictly interlinked with the setup of a conducive enabling (Aol 2.2.3), and 
regulatory (Aol 2.1.4) environment, with food trade liberalization (Aol 2.1.6) and increase in efficiency 
gains in FVCs (Aol 2.2.1). The active participation and capacity strengthening of local authorities are 
also necessary conditions (Aol 5.5.2). 
Action Agenda 
 
 '1. Strengthen linkages with local economies 
The success of EZs depends on their connection with local economies, local employment generation 
knowledge and technology and know-how transfer, and human capital creation. It is essential for project 
 
 
'S The exhaustive legal framework can be found at https://www-beza.gov.bd/investing-in-zones/legal-frameworks/ 
'TM BEZA. 2016, Bangladesh Economic Zones Development Guide 
https://openjicareport.jica.go.jp/pdf/ 12288353 01 pdf 
"5 BEZA. 2017. Investors' Guide -A Guide to invest in Economic Zones hitps://www.beza.gov.bd/wp- 
content/uploads/201 7/05/Investors-Guide.pdf

proponents, both private and public, to timely consult local stakeholders and to take into consideration 
environmental and socio-economic factors from the appraisal phase of the business plans, in order to 
obtain local consensus, and to prevent adverse reactions from the local communities, For instance, 
public consultations should be publicized well in advance to ensure broad public participation and 
socio-economic considerations should be included in the proposal assessment. 
 
 2. identify areas, roles and gaps to develop agricultural produce EZs 
BEZA, in coordination with the MoInd, the MoA and local government authorities, will identify areas 
where agro-processing zones could have the highest impact in terms of job creation and human capital 
development. Regions where specific horticulture produce crops can be processed for commercial 
viability, given the soil conditions, topography, climate and nutrient content, should be mapped. An 
analysis of territorial competitiveness of the selected areas will be produced, in line with local 
stakeholders* buy-in and interests and private investors' requests. The territorial competitiveness studies 
will aim at providing an analysis at local level (district/upazila level) by market-specific (agricultural 
specialisation, availability of workforce and productive inputs) and development-specific indicators 
(contribution to broader Bangladesh economic development) and by identifying infrastructural and 
resource endowment (power generation capacity, logistics corridors -air, road, sea, rail- health facilities, 
education facilities, availability of social housing and other amenities) which would contribute to 
preserve nutritional value in the produce. This will allow to assess gaps and investment needs and 
identify solutions through either PPP or private investments. 
 
 3. Promote learning from international experience, practice and standards 
BEZA and the MoC in collaboration with regional organizations, ADB, FAO, OECD, the World Bank 
and other DPs will reach out to relevant institutions in other countries to share relevant successful 
experience in the development of EZs focused on agro-processing. For instance, Environmental Impact 
Assessment of projects will draw from international standard practice. The case of cooperation between 
investment promotion and anti-corruption monitoring institutions set up in Thailand and Cambodia ts 
another example of good practice which Bangladesh may learn from. 
 
Cross references 
» NFPSP PoA Aol 2.1.4; 2.1.6; 2.2.1; 2.2.3; 2.3.1.5 5.5.2 
*» PP2041 
¢ BEZA Investors' Guide (2017) 
Aol 2.3.4. Build the capacity of the private sector to test food and communicate results to and 
engage With value chain actors for adequate remedial actions, and establish food traceability 
mechanisms 
Rationale 
Given the extensive role of private sector in the FYC, its capacity to maintain food safety standards is 
a major challenge. While the government is responsible for creating a legal and regulatory environment 
towards food safety and ensuring compliance (see Aol 5.1.1), the capacity of the private sector to 
comply with these rules needs to be reinforced through improved understanding of the issue and better 
practices. Trainings on GAP, GHP and GMP are essential to this effect, but they remain infrequent 
compared to the needs across the country. Although there has been some progress in BSTI awarding 
food system management certificates to producers and manufacturers in recent years -reflecting 
compliance with food safety standards set by the authority in their management and quality- the number 
remains low. Initiatives have been taken by several UN and Global Trade Promotion bodies to 
strengthen the capacity of Bangladesh Accreditation Board (BAB) to provide accreditation to 
certification and inspection agencies based on international standards (ISO 17020 and ISO 17021). 
es 495!

Businesses also need to be able to demonstrate their compliance to consumers so as to maintain their 
confidence and reduce possible liability, especially in a context of heightened publicity of the problems 
of food safety and food adulteration related issues. The BFSA drive to introduce an international 
gradation system for restaurants can help to this effect but needs to be accelerated and expanded 
nationally. More consumer awareness (Aol 5.1.3) will create more demand for safe foods, giving the 
private sector an incentive to comply with the required standards. Businesses also need to be able to 
implement effective food traceability (Aol 5.1.2) and recall systems, both of which are still limited. 
Concurrently, private testing laboratories are needed across the country to respond to the growing local 
needs (see Aol 5.1.1). 
Action Agenda 
1, Accelerate GAP, GAqP, GHP, GMP training and knowledge transfer (see Aol 5.1.2., Action 
6) 
Customized training on GAP, Good Aquaculture Practices (GAqP), GHP, GMP, and other good 
practices will be provided to the relevant FVC actors on a regular basis and across the country, including 
marginal and small producers. The SME Foundation, the Bangladesh Institute of Research and Training 
on Applied Nutrition (BIRTAN), PKSF, public universities, and extension services of the government 
body will contribute to devising and implementing these trainings. 
 
 
 
2. Prepare strategy, guidelines, and Standard Operating Procedures for the private sector 
See Aol (5.1,.2., Action 2) 
 
3. Build capacities of private sector to test, trace, recall foods and communicate with the public 
Capacities of all private sector FVC actors - producers, distributors, marketers, and retailers, will be 
strengthened - so that they understand the importance of and are able to engage in activities relating to 
testing food safety and recall management. Aol 5.1.2 details the actions needed to establish traceability 
mechanisms. They should also be trained to communicate with the public both to advertise their 
adherence to food safety standards, in cases of breakdowns in food safety, to foster greater transparency 
and trust by consumers. 
4. Promote the establishment of food testing laboratories 
 
 
In addition to the BFSA designated food testing laboratories, the establishment of accredited private 
laboratories will be promoted to test food in all districts. These will be decided by taking into account 
the location of agro-processing hotspots, risk assessments and a cost benefit analysis. PPP modalities 
may be used to meet the needs of the country and set up a network of laboratories. 
 
 
5. Promote private sector based accredited independent certification and inspection agencies for 
both large and MSMEs and issue trade licenses 
 
Private sector based independent certification and inspection agencies are key in ensuring food safety. 
In Bangladesh, mechanisms are mostly in place for large-scale food processing industries to obtain their 
GMP, GHP, HACCP, and ISO 22000 certifications, but this is not the case for MSMEs. Strengthening 
the Bangladesh Agriculture Certification Board and BAB could play a key role in this regard (see Aol 
5.1.1. for more on this). Efforts will be made to facilitate the issuance of trade licenses to SMEs that 
maintain food quality and food safety standards. 
 
6. Strengthen consumer forums and build consumer awareness 
Educating consumers and raising their awareness on food safety (as advocated in Aol 5.1.3) will create 
a demand for safe food which will incentivise the private sector to pay attention to, and to improve their 
communication on this issue to the public. 
Cross references 
e NENSP PoA Aol 5.1.1.; 5.1.2.; 5.1.3.

Strategy 2.4 Raise incomes of the poor and food insecure 
Aol 2.4.1. Expand and promote agriculture-driven, off-farm employment and other employment 
along the food value chain by expanding vocational training opportunities for rural youth, women 
and disabled people 
Rationale 
Rural youth, women, and disabled persons, lack earning opportunities in agriculture, with negative 
repercussions on their FNS. Indeed, they have less access to land, and hence benefit less from efforts to 
create jobs on-farm. Lack of adequate skills, information asymmetry, low market integration, and 
inadequate extension services are other factors that prevent these disadvantaged groups from 
successfully engaging in on-farm income generating activities. Moreover, in the medium to long run, 
increasing mechanisation and growing land scarcity will also mean fewer opportunities for on-farm job 
creation, Expansion and promotion of agriculture-driven off-farm employment opportunities along the 
FVC can facilitate income generation for these three groups, Off-farm employment includes extension 
services, processing, packaging, storage, transportation distribution, and retail. Adapted vocational 
training arrangements for skill generation, market integration and extension services may help make 
them economically solvent, as well as training and capacity development along with financial services 
and development of market linkages (see Aol 2.4.2 and Aol 2.2.2). Currently however, the Technical 
anid Vocational Education and Training (TVET) sector faces multi-faceted challenges such as the 
absence of comprehensive training needs assessments, lack of responsiveness to market demands, small 
size of the industrial base, low female participation, inconsistent certification according to the National 
Skill Development Policy 2011, and poor monitoring and governance. There are also shortcomings in 
service delivery and in the utilization of these services provided by public institutions. If the skills gap 
that exists is to be filled in order to create employment along the FVC, regulation mechanisms need to 
be strengthened and the quality of the skill training system ensured through accreditation of courses, 
TVET certification, and registration of training providers. 
Action Agenda 
1. Increase market demand-based vocational training on the food value chain for rural 
youth, women, and disabled persons 
The need for training of rural youth, women, and disabled persons, to develop adequate skills to run an 
enterprise is recognised as an issue to be dealt with in the 8F YP and can be addressed through location 
specific community-based TVET training focusing on the agri-food sector including on activities 
related to food processing, packaging, storage, transportation, and retail sale. Promoting safe marketing 
of food and commodities (sce Strategy 11.4 of the 2017 Bangladesh National Youth Policy (BNYP), 
especially food production safe from chemical and environmental hazards (BNYP Strategy 11.4.1), and 
incentivizing rural youth (BNYP Strategy 11.4.2) to become self-employed in safe food marketing, 
would be also an effective strategy. A market demand based well-designed course focusing on the rural 
community setting and particular agro-ccological zones may help rural enterprise growth in line with 
the draft National Skill Development Policy 2020. Existing TVET services need to be modernized to 
provide rural-based training in high demand areas in order to enhance participation from women, youth 
and the disabled (Aol 2.4.2). 
 
 
es 51 0!

2. Capacity building training for women enterprises 
MSMEs face a substantial challenge in their productivity in terms of value added per worker and low 
average wage''®. The National Strategy for Promotion of Gender Equality in TVET aimed to increase 
female participation from 13% to 40% by 2020. To increase the productivity level of these already 
existing enterprises and to integrate left out women, capacitics need to be built and credit facilities, 
extension services and ICT services (see Aol 1.1.4) provided, along with market integration. Women 
market corner at cach village marketplace as well as in growth centres can help develop agro-food sector 
value chains'''; however, without skilled women entrepreneurs, this may not be sustainable. Training 
can be arranged from both public and private agencies, in order to support market linkages (both 
horizontal and vertical integration). ICT-based women enterprise platforms may help in this regard, 
providing both physical and online training facilities. Financial inclusion through the availability of 
digital mobile phones with low-cost internet connections and mobile financial services for rural women 
can increase productivity, through participation in capacity development training . 
 
3. Promote training on Agri Service Centres for repair and servicing of agriculture 
machineries 
Most rural areas suffer from inadequate service centres for agricultural machineries as well as lack of 
skilled mechanics. TVET training on agricultural machineries' repairing and servicing could provide 
an income generating activity to rural youth, women, and the disabled community. In addition, 
establishing agri-service centres in rural areas through private-public initiatives could help mobilize this 
under-used rural manpower. Piloting some model service centres by DAE with public funding, and 
running it by TVET-trained rural youth could play a vital role in this regard, 
 
4. Capacity development training for promoting Custom Hiring Centres for agriculture 
implements 
Custom Hiring Centres are a platform where farmers, entrepreneurs, and society interact, and where 
farm machineries, implements and equipment can be hired, These centres provide easy access to costly 
farm machinery, and to efficient and timely use of inputs by small and marginal farmers, and enables 
them to adopt climate resilient practices and technologies, reduce labour use, increase cropping 
intensity, recycle crop residue, and overall, reduce the cost of farming. However, Custom Hiring Centres 
require skilled workers and managers. Both TVET and private sector training facilities can help engage 
rural youth, women, and disabled persons in this process, Enabling private sector investment in 
agriculture machinery and their hiring service provision through digital technology would be key, in 
addition to the capacity development of these three groups. 
 
'5. Strengthen coordination among government agencies 
Harmonized coordination among the apex government agencies for skill development in the FVC is 
essential since training service delivery and its utilization in the FVC falls under more than one 
government agency. For example, the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) under the Ministry of 
Education (MoE), Department of Women Affairs under the Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 
(MoWCA) and Department of Youth Development (DYD) under the Ministry of Youth and Sports 
(MoYS) are key for off-farm employment generation. In this regard, Bangladesh Technical Education 
Board (BTEB) should strengthen its regulation mechanism and ensure the quality of the skill training 
system through accreditation of courses, TVET certification and registration of training providers. 
Cross references 
¢ NFPSP PoA Aol 1.1.4. Improve timely access to credit, including micro-credit, to small-scale 
producers through suitable institutional reforms, 2.2.2. Encourage and support the 
 
4 World Bank.2019. Financing Solutions for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in Bangiadesh. World Bank and PRL. 
''? Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU). 2020. Op, cit. 
EEE

establishment and growth of self-supporting financially viable MSMEs, 2.4.2. Provide adequate 
credit, technology, information, and other related services for the growth of agro-based 
industries and the broader rural non-farm economy, with special emphasis on the most 
vulnerable sections of the population 
e BNYP 2017 
e National Skill Development Policy 2011 
Aol 2.4.2. Provide adequate credit, technology, information and other related services for the 
growth of agro-based industries and the broader rural non-farm economy, with special emphasis 
for the most vulnerable sections of the population 
Rationale 
Poor and vulnerable people are constrained from getting access to safe and nutritious foods, due to lack 
of purchasing power. Increased incomes and greater access to local markets for fruits, vegetables and 
animal produce, as part of agro-enterprise promotion could positively impact on dietary diversification. 
Promoting both agro-industries and non-farm enterprises, with an inclusive approach targeting 
vulnerable groups like poor unemployed youth, persons with disabilities (PwD) and women can 
enhance both income and food security. Greater opportunities will be created to earn enhanced income 
by supporting agro-based industnes including service industries - storage, value addition, packaging 
and marketing of food and beverages, fibres and textiles, abattoirs, leather industries, farm implements, 
bio-pesticides and bio-fertilisers and animal feed, and non-farm cottage, micro and small (CMS) 
enterprises - artisanal and handicrafts, tailoring, construction, petty shop, trading, tourism, and 
healthcare (Aol 2.2.2, 2.4.1, 4.3.4). Necessary access to finance, technology, information and technical 
know-how will be facilitated towards this (Aol 1.1.4). The Microcredit Regulatory Authority has set a 
ceiling of 27% annual rate of interest on microcredit ''*. The poor will benefit from access to small 
amounts of credit at lower rates of interest (Aol 2.2.4). With regards to technology, nearly half of rural 
houscholds have no access to computers in their village and 59% do not have access to a smartphone'"". 
Following the International Labour Organization's guidelines for an inclusive workforce, the DTE has 
allocations to provide PwD with training and financial support to start enterprise activities, These 
initiatives will contribute to generation of wage employment also and further boost the economy. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Increase access of formal sector finance with special emphasis for the most vulnerable sections 
of the population 
Efforts will be made to increase access to individual and group based agro-based (both crop and animal 
husbandry) and non-farm CMS enterprise activities as proposed under Aols 1.1.4 and 2.1.2 but 
emphasising the participation of the most vulnerable and usually excluded sections of the population. 
In particular, collateral-free access to microcredit will be facilitated as well as a lowering of interest 
rates. The Bangladesh Bank has introduced measures to increase access to formal sector credit. Banks 
and Non-bank Finance Institutions (NBFIs) can get refinance for promotion of agro-based product 
processing industry; and new entrepreneurs in CMS industry sector. CMS enterprises that use by- 
products such as straw/husk, hay, jute leaf, jute stick etc., will also be promoted and market linkages 
facilitated, in line with the National Agriculture Policy (NAP) (2018), Efforts will be made to increase 
access to microcredit for small borrowers, to undertake enterprise activities, in line with the PP204] 
 
"* Institute of Microfinance. 2016. Interest Rates in Bangladesh Microcredit Market. Policy Brief 
'? Bin Shadat, Md. W, Md.S. Islam, I. Zahan & M. Matin. 2020. Digital Literacy of Rural Households in Bangladesh. BRAC 
Institute of Governance and Development (BIGD) BRAC University 
Ss 53 ||

that aims at creating employment for 1000 male and female youth every year from each upazila, 
Separate allocation will be made to target PwD and make them more self-reliant. 
 
2, Improve productivity of the use of credit 
Productivity of the use of credit will be improved through need-based training for acquiring skills in 
enterprise activities, and technology transfer to the borrowers. The 8F YP emphasizes the need for skill 
training and need-based TVET programmes, Access to training in marginalized areas and for 
vulnerable groups will be improved by rolling out community-based training targeting key rural 
industries such as agriculture, livestock, fisherics and handicrafts, as well as providing skills relevant 
to rural infrastructure and the development of a range of community services and specially designed 
courses developed for increased employment opportunities for under-privileged groups, in line with the 
draft National Skill Development Policy 2020. Existing TVET Institutes will be developed and 
modernized to offer training in available rural technologies to meet the challenge of the fast-changing 
economy in rural settings and attention given to establishing rural-based training institutes in high 
demand areas and the participation of women and PwD facilitated, with the PP 2041 in focus. 
3. Extend support to organisations that promote women entrepreneurs 
Support to organisations that promote women entreprencurs in informal and formal economy will be 
extended, giving access to finance schemes such as micro-credit. To encourage female entrepreneurs to 
take CMS and medium enterprise initiatives, refinance facility is being provided by Bangladesh Bank 
to banks and NBFIs at lower rate of interest. Banks and NBFIs can ayail Refinance Facility at 3% 
interest rate as against 5% earlier against their disbursed CMS and medium enterprise loan, so that the 
customer can avail the same at 7% interest rate instead of 9% earlier. For greater inclusion of marginal 
and home-based women entrepreneurs, the loan limit has been set up to BDT 10,000 and group-based 
lending of up to BDT 50,000 is permitted'*° All effort will be made to address gender imbalance in 
skill training and for targeting women in particular, as stated in the draft National Skill Development 
Policy 2020. 
 
4. Expand access to ICT, and cell phone connectivity in rural areas and reduce digital divide | 
In order to improve access to market information so that poor and vulnerable sections of the population 
can expand access to markets and derive financial benefits, access to ICT, and cell phone connectivity 
in rural areas will be expanded. Steps will be taken to bridge this gap and to ensure adequate information 
access to vulnerable populations for availing opportunitics to enhance their income carning 
opportunities. The $F YP is committed to making digital and mobile financial services more effective 
in financial inclusion of poor and marginalized groups, supporting small business holders and 
addressing gender disparity, 
Cross references 
NFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.4.; 2.1.2.5 2.2.2; 2.2.42; 2.4.1; 4.3.4. 
8FYP 2020-2025 
NAP 2018 
PP 2041 
Draft National Skill Development Policy 2020 
 
20 Bangladesh Bank. 2020. Annual Report 2019-20 
3 Os

4. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 3 of the PoA 
Objective 3: To enhance the consumption and utilization of healthy and diversified diets for 
achieving nutrition improvements 
 
 
nutrient gap analysis considering energy and nutrient demand for a healthy and active life 
Rationale 
In order to achieve optimum health and nutritional well-being, it is essential to ensure the availability, 
continuous supply, access and consumption of diversified nutrient-rich, safe foods at affordable cost to 
meet the nutrient demands of the population, by age, sex, physical activity and physiological status. A 
gap remains between desirable and actual dietary patterns. An average gap of 83 kcal remains between 
energy requirements of 2400 kcal versus 2318 keal.'*! Even though the per capita intake of rice 
decreased ftom 416g in 2010 to 367g in 2016, this is still higher than the desirable norm of 350g. 
Conversely, the per capita vegetable intake of 167g in 2016 is much lower than the desirable intake of 
300g. Among animal source foods (ASF), only fish consumption meets the desirable intake. As national 
household averages, these estimates do not indicate individual dietary diversity and nutrient adequacy. 
An assessment of the gap in availability and actual dietary intake is needed at the individual level to 
plan food production and supply. Per capita energy and nutrient requirements for different groups across 
the life cycle are also needed for food planning. Long-term food planning for ensuring healthy and 
nutritious diet is an immediate need for Bangladesh considering its growing population, income growth, 
socioeconomic status, and high burden of child malnutrition. Additionally, rapid urbanization and the 
changing food systems are transforming traditional food patterns to modern ones with an increased 
consumption of processed or fast foods, especially in urban areas. The consumption of highly processed 
sugar-rich, high fat and salty products and ultra-processed foods e.g., sugar-sweetened drinks increase 
the risk of overweight, obesity and NCDs. 
Action Agenda 
 
 1. Establish and achieve nutrient targets (in line with Pillar III of the CIP2) 
There is need to establish and achieve the proposed normative nutrient targets for long-term national 
and sector-specific diversified food planning. This needs to consider the energy and nutrient 
requirements, desirable dietary pattern (DDP), and per capita consumption at individual levels. To this 
end, it is essential to adapt the methodology for determining recommended dietary intake and compute 
macro- and micronutrients requirements for different population groups with varying age, body size, 
occupation, and physiological states. Recent evidence from the Indian Recommended Dietary 
Allowances 2020'* suggests adjustments in the energy and nutrient requirements that may be 
considered as a frame of reference, given the developmental transition and increase in the double burden 
of malnutrition across South Asia, The DDP needs to be adopted for promoting the intake of different 
foods according to age, sex physiological and physical activity needs for individuals across populations 
from different regions in Bangladesh. Moreover, normative standards and methodologies will be 
adapted for establishing long-term targets for physical growth using dynamic tools/mechanisms to 
ascertain per capita consumption of cereals and other foods for diversified food planning. This requires 
 
2) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2017. Second National Plan of Action for Nutrition (2016-2025), Government of 
Bangladesh 
2 I1CMR-NIN. 2620. Nutrient requirements for Indians. ICMR-National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, India 
es SS I

an understanding of the food supply situation and projections that can help set realistic consumption 
targets, cnhance diversified food supply and stimulate diversified food demand. 
 
 2, Carry out nutrient gap analysis 
Food consumption measurement and nutrient gap analysis need to be carried out in a timely and periodic 
manner, ideally every three years. Although the International Food Policy Research Institute's (IFPRI) 
Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey (BIHS) collected individual food consumption data, it covers 
only rural areas. There is need for a national food consumption survey to provide estimates for 
measurable dietary indicators which assess the current food consumption, dietary and nutrient intake 
and the food security situation to inform and refine future nutrition programming interventions. There 
is also a need to include in-depth analyses of consumer perception and behaviour on the attributes of 
foods, food choices and the drivers for healthy food consumption. Secondary data from national sources 
(such as the Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES), BIHS, the Bangladesh Demographic 
and Health Survey (BDHS) and the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS)) will also be used and 
applied to identify the enabling factors and barriers to nutrient intake, in particular the availability, cost 
and affordability of nutritious diets, and their linkages with nutritional status. It will engage multiple 
stakeholders from public and private sectors to prioritize context-specific strategies to meet the energy 
and nutrient targets for everyone in the population. 
 
3. Periodically update national dietary guidelines and implement them (as per NPAN2 Key 
Action Area 6.2.9) 
The updated national dietary guidelines 2020 outlines the desirable dietary intake for the Bangladeshi 
population based on an aggregated food supply - nutrient gap calculation and nutrient targets established 
to inform diversified agricultural production and enhance the consumption of diversified (healthy) 
foods. Based on the WHO/FAO 2004'* proposed energy requirements, normative nutrient guidance 
has been outlined, translating these into food requirements. From the WHO/FAO 2004 energy 
requirements, an average requirement of 2430 kcal/day'TM* has been computed for a Bangladeshi adult, 
across the general population. The national dietary guidelines are a consolidated set of general, age and 
disease-specific guidelines to serve as a tool in agriculture, food, and nutrition planning. With the 
periodic update of the dietary guidelines, there is need for implementing these as a tool to inform FNS 
policy and planning for healthy food supply, inform the establishing of healthy food standards along 
with national FCTs, and promote nationwide dissemination as a nutntion education tool to enhance the 
demand for the consumption of healthy diets (in line with Aol 3.2.1). 
 
 
 4. Update FCTs and propose a food list for healthy diets 
FCTs'TM are essential for food and agriculture planning, setting nutrient targets for policy and planning, 
formulation of institutional and therapeutic diet, food-based nutrition training, nutrition labelling, food 
regulation and consumer protection. In Bangladesh, the current FCT was published in 2013. It is 
important to update FCTs and include more foods with nutrient composition information notably with 
reference to cnergy, nutrients (c.g., protein, fat, carbohydrate, vitamins and minerals), and other 
nutritionally important food constituents (e.g., fibre, anti-nutrients, phytonutrients, etc.). It will also help 
to develop a key food list that prioritises locally available low-cost nutritious foods, especially 
considering the food patterns of the ethnic groups and remoteness of some areas like char, haor and 
hilly regions. This food list will also consider traditionally underutilized foods that are nutrient-dense 
(see Aol 1.2.1 and 3.2.1). The list is essential to encourage consumption of a diverse range of nutrient- 
dense, locally grown foods including animal source foods, fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. 
Moreover, FCTs and the key food lists need to be disseminated and regularly updated. These should 
also include foods with high nutrient densities that can be used in comprehensive food planning, to 
 
 
2 UN University, WHO and FAO, 2004. Human energy requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert 
Consultation. 
4 Ministry of Food, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare & FAO.2015. Dietary guidelines for Bangladesh. Government 
of Bangladesh 
5 INFS-DU & FAO. 2013. Food Composition Table for Bangladesh 
 
so

guide the demand and supply of a wide range of foods and help meet the dietary nutrient targets by 
encouraging the production of nutrient-dense crops, horticulture, and ASF, through homestead garden, 
poultry, and livestock. Affordability of foods would need to be a key consideration in this regard. 
Cross references 
e NEFNSP PoA Aol 1.2.1.; 3.2.1 
¢ CIP2 Outcome III. Improved dietary diversity, consumption and utilisation 
NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.9. Promoting of FBDG for healthy dict 
Aol 3.1.2. Support the implementation of desirable dietary pattern (DDP) plans for a healthy and 
sustainable food system 
Rationale 
Latest available estimates indicate that the prevalence of acute malnutrition (wasting) is 9.8% among 
under-five children. Similarly, only one in three children aged 6-23 months has a Minimum Acceptable 
Diet (MAD)'**. National estimates reveal that more than half of the women of reproductive age 
consumed five out of 10 food groups, indicative of Minimum Dietary Diversity (MDD)"*'. During the 
COVID-19 pandemic, only 27% of male and 37% of female adolescents and youth (10-24 years) had 
adequate MDD", indicative of micronutrient inadequacy in the diets given the lack of access to fresh 
fruits and vegetables, dairy and poultry from the food system. DDP provides normative guidance for 
planning healthy diets using dictary and nutritional principles. It guides uptake and implementation of 
DDP based nutrition targets into the sectoral plans of agriculture, livestock and fisheries, to produce 
and enable consumption of nutrient-dense and healthy foods. Given the emerging impacts of climate 
change on nutrition coupled with the multiple burden of malnutrition, there will be a need to advise 
policy shifts to increase consumption of plant-based foods (fruits, vegetables, nuts, legumes) and reduce 
consumption of red meat and sugar for both health and environmental benefits. Therefore, integrated 
nutrition guidance tools, which provide guidance beyond DDP and consider cross cutting issues that 
impact food systems and diets will be needed, A balance of plant and animal-based foods within the 
framework of the DDP is imminently required. Accordingly, evaluation of diets and food systems 
practices for nutrition outcomes can together contribute towards achievement of the SDGs and the Paris 
Agreement, to which Bangladesh is a signatory!" , 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Focus on smallholder farmers as important change agents for improved food systems and 
nutrition 
Smallholders in agriculture, fisheries and livestock need support from the GoB's programme of 
assistance through growth centres to continue their farm profitably and responsibly through local 
production of diversified nutrient-dlense foods (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.6.1). Upazila 
"Growth Centres" will facilitate access to credit, quality inputs, sale of agricultural produce, temporary 
storage and marketing. In line with the 8FYP, immediate actions will be taken to enhance access to 
finance for small poultry and livestock farmers to meet the huge target of animal source foods to meet 
the needs for good quality protein and bioavailable micronutrients in the diet 2025. Access to bank 
financing at affordable rates of interest and insurance schemes for small growers and entrepreneurs will 
 
 
'%6 National Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT) & ICF. 2020, Bangladesh Demographic and Health 
Survey 2017-18. Dhaka, Bangladesh, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: NIPORT and ICF 
2? Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), 2020. Op. cit. 
"8 MUCH FAO. 2020. A rapid survey of youth on COVID-19 related nutrition awareness, behaviour and food security m 
Bangladesh. 
8 The Paris Agreement is an agreement within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
dealing with greenhouse gas emissions mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the year 2020 
® EAT Laneect Commission. 2019. Healthy Dicts from Sustainable Food Systems, Food Planct, Health. 
es S' 1!

be facilitated (see Aol 1.1.4 and 2.1.2, NAP PoA Key Aol 1.6.1). Equipped with appropriate equipment, 
technologies and training through the DAE and DAM (see Aol 1,1.2, 2.3.1 and 3.2.1) for enhanced 
production, storage, semi-commercial or household processing, packaging, nutrient labelling, 
marketing, preservation and safe food preparation, smallholder farmers can contribute to ensuring 
yearlong access and consumption of nutrient-dense, safe foods (in line with NPAN2 6.2.5), 
 
2. Promote the productive role of women in the food system value chain and provide 
required support 
Nutrition-sensitive agriculture, horticulture, and livestock interventions for women with small 
landholdings (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 2.4.4) will help enable availability and access to 
diversified food and provide a sectoral entry point for nutrition education and related health-hygiene- 
sanitation services. Women farmers are challenged by the trade-offs in the allocation of their time to 
the dual productive and reproductive roles, Localized food system interventions can address this gap, 
help recognize the value of women's household activities and contribute to their empowerment while 
enabling them to achieve their optimum potential (see Aol 5.4.2). In line with 8FYP, women 
empowerment activities will focus on training, post-training support, linking them to markets, promote 
leadership and income-generation. Trainings on entrepreneurship skills for small scale food 
manufacturing and local cooperatives for group marketing/ self-help groups for women entrepreneurs 
will be organized. Mainstreaming nutrition training and behaviour change communication - BCC (see 
Aol 3.2.1) across local food systems and targeting women from and small and marginal farmers' 
households will help to enhance their nutrition and food safety knowledge and awareness so as to 
influence healthy food preparation, correct food choices and diversified food consumption at the 
household level (in line with NNP Key Action Area 6.2.5). Furthermore, linking community clinic- 
based BCC activities with the food systems services and social protection programmes will be 
facilitated to cover a wider outreach of the community, especially women who are not often reached by 
the National Nutrition Services (NNS). 
 
3. Incorporate integrated nutrition guidance tools to inform food system for healthy and 
sustainable diets 
As indicated in the rationale, integrated nutrition guidance tools encompassing nutrition principles with 
gender, local farming systems and climate change issues can help inform food system changes to make 
healthy diets available, accessible, affordable, and sustainable. These changes can be guided by the 
following actions: (1) to develop and disseminate nutrition guidance tools to sensitize and inform food 
systems for transformation to supply healthy diets taking into account economic, ecological and 
environmental circumstances (in line with Aols 3.1.1 and 3.2.1); (2) promote nutrition behaviour 
change through nutrition guidance tools including dictary guidelines for consumer awareness and to 
stimulate demand for healthy diets (in line NPAN2 6.2.9 and as proposed under Aol 3.2.1,); (3) ensure 
affordable and healthy dicts for the most vulnerable populations (see Aol 4.3.2). Emphasis on enhancing 
the production and consumption of fruits and vegetables, whole grains local millets, plant protein 
sources (nuts, oilseeds, beans, lentils) and moderate amounts of animal source of protein (local fish, 
poultry and dairy) for a healthy and sustainable diet will be the key, 
 
4, Enhance private sector engagement for market-based approach for safe and healthy diets 
at affordable cost 
Private sector including local, small and medium-size enterprises and multi-national companies, are 
required to be engaged to bring innovative approaches and technologies for safe and healthy dicts. 
Market-based approaches are essential to support the private sectors to develop sustained and effective 
access to nutritious and healthy products and services at an affordable cost for entire populations. To 
this end, the SUN Business network can play an important role to enhance private sector engagement 
and strengthening their capacity to improve the enabling environment for influencing the food system 
for a healthier diet, Consumer education and promotion of healthy and diversified food groups, nutrient 
labelling, dietary guidelines, and food safety practices (as proposed in 3.2.1) will help the consumers to 
 
ls

make informed choices of foods and food products that confer nutrition, hygiene, and health benefits. 
The Consumers' Association of Bangladesh (CAB) will need to organize nutrition and food safety 
advocacy activities on a nationwide basis to create awareness among consumers. 
Cross references 
e WNEFNSP PoA Aol 1.1.2.; 1.1.4.5 2.1.2.5 2.3.1.2 3.1.1; 3.2.1; 4,3.2.; 5.4.2. 
¢ NAP PoA 2020 Key Areas of Interventions 1.1.1 Productivity convergence for meeting current 
and future demand of nutritious food; 1.6.1 Establishing Growth Center in each upazilas (492) 
for facilitating access to credit, quality inputs, sale of agri. produce, temporary storage and 
marketing, Aol 2.4.4 Multi-dimensional Role of Women in Agriculture and Gender Equity 
¢ NPAN2 NNP Strategy 6.2.5: Major activities: Promote food preservation and effective 
storage through trainings; Key Action area 6.2.9. Promoting of FBDG for healthy diet 
® 8FYP 2020-2025 
Aol 3.1.3. Expand human resources and strengthen institutional arrangements to improve 
performance of nutrition services with special emphasis on field level 
Rationale 
A human resource needs assessment by the Bangladesh National Nutrition Council (BNNC) revealed a 
shortage of skilled resources at national and sub national levels to implement the NPAN2. Out of 22 
ministries involved in implementing this PoA, more than 17 also contribute to the implementation of 
the CIP2(2016-2020)and to the NFNSP 2020. In this regard, a demand needs to be created for accessing 
multisectoral nutrition services at the field level and for the communities to undertake nutrition-relevant 
actions to improve their dicts and nutrition. The interface between national and subnational (district 
and upazila) institutional arrangements needs to be strengthened to facilitate and mobilize field level 
implementers. A need has been notified to fill the nutrition-relevant vacancies at national and sub 
national levels. With a dominance of upazila Medical Officers and civil surgeons in the supervision and 
implementation of nutrition services at the field level, there is focus on the curative aspects of service 
delivery', The Medical Officers with clinical expertise are also responsible for nutrition services that 
encompass activities related to food and agriculture beyond the domains of the health sector. To this 
end, BNNC has developed minimum nutrition packages to be delivered through the Upazila and District 
Nutrition Coordination Committees (UNCC and DNCC) at the subnational levels through multi- 
sectoral expertise. To meet this need, the institutional arrangements and capacity to improve 
performance and delivery of multisectoral nutrition services across MoHFW, MoA, MoFL, MoWCA, 
MoE need strengthening and expansion. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Recruit staff to work on nutrition-related matters (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 
6.3.15 and 6.3.20) 
Action will be taken to fill up all the vacant positions of MoHFW for health /nutrition service delivery 
personnel. Besides, based on the needs' assessment, allocation and recruitment of nutrition workforce 
need to be accelerated. The post of district nutritionist in facilities/hospitals needs to be sanctioned to 
recruit nutritionists with integrated expertise of public health nutrition, food security and food safety 
for enhanced technical support across all core ministries to promote healthy and safe food for improving 
nutrition outcomes. Further, the position of upazila nutritionists will be created and recruitment done 
for all upazilas to provide technical support to field personnel/extension workers at entry pointsof health, 
agriculture, education and social welfare, that help increase the coverage and outreach of nutrition 
services at subnational levels. 
 
 
') UNICEF, 2013. Nutrition capacity assessment in Bangladesh 
es 5° |!

2. Strengthen institutional capacity of the Bangladesh National Nutrition Council (BNNC) 
(in line with Aol 5.5.1, NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.3.14 and 6.5.10, and CIP2 Programme 
V.4.2) 
The institutional capacity of BNNC and other institutions working on FNS programmes needs to be 
strengthened for effective implementation of NPAN2, CIP and NFNSP. Bottleneck analysis by BNNC 
points towards challenges and gaps that require strengthening with the delivery of responsibilities and 
terms of reference. Furthermore, existing linkages between key institutions within Bangladesh and with 
international institutions will be fostered for capacity building and identifying and sharing technical 
expertise of the institutions. This would help to identify and establish nutrition focal points with specific 
terms of reference and accountability across the sectors/divisions/departments/services to support in 
planning, resource mobilization, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of nutrition activities 
across sectors, at national and subnational level. The institutional capacity of the BNNC needs to be 
strengthened to orient the DNCC and UNCC for scaling up multisectoral approaches towards 
formulation of district/ upazila level multisectoral annual nutrition plan to implement minimum 
nutrition packages aligned with NPAN2 at subnational level. 
3. Enhance human resources capacity and nutrition expertise with multisectoral training 
and experience (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.3.14) 
 
 
Based on the human resource capacity need assessments, training and sensitization workshops will be 
organized to meet the demand for strengthening capacity of GoB officials from different ministries on 
FNS at national and sub-national levels. Food-based Nutrition training will be mainstreamed in the 
training of trainers, and pre-and in-service training of existing staff across sectors/departments/ 
program mes. Periodic nutrition training that is given to agriculture extension officials will be 
continued. Moreover, food-based nutrition trainings and orientation workshops will be scaled up 
for DNNC and UNCC members to enhance their capacity on both nutrition-specific and nutrition- 
sensitive interventions and policies that feed into the annual multi-sectoral nutrition plan at 
district and upazila level in collaboration with BNNC (MoHFW), BIRTAN (MoA) and FPMU 
(MoFood) as well as through the trainings conducted by the DYD (MoYS), Based on the human 
resource capacity needs assessment, appropriate measure will also be taken to conduct training for all 
the field personnel relevant to nutrition service delivery. 
Cross references 
® NFNSP Aol 5.5.1 
* NPAN2 Key Action Area: 6.3.14, Make the existing health system universal, utilize the system 
effectively, and estimate effective manpower needs for the purpose; 6.3.15. Filling up of vacant 
posts for health service delivery personnel; 6.3.20. Ensuring sanctioned post for required 
Nutritionists in facilities/hospitals; 6.5.10. Institutionalize BNNC Office with new structure/ 
platforms and strengthen accountability 
e CIP2 Programme V.4.2. Strengthen capacities to design and monitor the new FNS Policy and 
implement, monitor and coordinate the CIP2 
-_--- Lee a acts - 
'ate: (32 Eovaeee yes 1 I nm } r + ---- moe a Sa 
4 freee A Tadeo Ser eo 
af 
: 
 
 
Aol 3.2.1 Develop and 4 promote | local foods, healthy cooking and food combinations, safe storage 
including knowledge on nutricnt labelling 
Rationale 
Locally grown nutrient-dense foods have enormous benefits on health, economy, and the environment, 
Indeed, they are contributing to diversity in dicts, can be produced in marginal land with limited inputs, 
do not require long supply chains and are often better adapted to their local environment with beneficial 
impact on the soil for example. Given the importance of nutrition in first 1000 days, nutrient-dense 
to

recipes have been developed and are being promoted through nutrition training and mass media 
campaigns by a number of institutions'"'. Concurrently, expanding the range of recipes based on 
updated FCTs needs to continue''. In Bangladesh, habitual food preparation techniques show 
considerable nutrient loss, especially of minerals and vitamins. Cooking rice in large volumes of water 
and discarding the excess water after boiling leads to loss of B-complex vitamins. Similarly, washing 
vegetables after cutting, results in greater loss of vitamins, and overcooking and open pan cooking 
methods have also shown substantial loss of vitamin C and B-complex vitamins'. On the other hand, 
some traditional practices such as roasting of grains and soaking pulses before cooking make the product 
more digestible and reduce micronutrient losses. Likewise, steaming and mashing vegetables or fish, 
using potatoes and certain vegetables with skin are beneficial in preventing loss of vitamins'**. 
Creating awareness on appropriate cooking techniques but also on ways to keep food safe while 
handling, preparing, storing and serving food, so as to ensure their nutritional quality and safety is 
needed, along with the understanding of food labels (which Aols 2.3.1 and 5.2.3 propose to develop), 
Action Agenda 
1. Promote production and consumption of local, neglected and underutilised nutritious foods 
(in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.1 and CIP2 Programme III.1) 
 
The key food list can also include indigenous and underutilised varieties/ breeds/ species to promote 
production and consumption of these foods (as proposed in Aols 1.2.5 and 3.1.1), The NUS, include 
minor cereals, indigenous fish species, fruits, vegetables, and seeds that are not commonly consumed 
despite their high nutrient content. The National FBDG and FCTs should include the nutrient content 
of these underutilized foods and indigenous foods. The dissemination of national FBDG and FCT will 
encourage not only to increase the production (as advocated under Aol 1.2.1) but also to consume these 
indigenous foods to promote biodiversity and food diversity. 
2. Develop nutrient-dense recipes (in line with CIP2 Programme II1.1.) 
Nutrient-dense recipes will continue to be developed, adapting them to local cultural practices and taste 
in order to enhance their acceptability. They will be adapted from the various recipe books for improved 
complementary feeding and maternal nutrition developed by Bangladesh Breastfeeding Foundation 
(BBF) and DAE respectively, and technically supported by FPMU and FAO. These are simple, healthy 
recipes using a variety of food groups to promote dietary diversity. They should be based on the FCTs 
and their promotion and dissemination should continue through food-based nutrition strategies 
integrated in horticulture, livestock, fisheries and school nutrition programmes and NNS (as proposed 
in Aol 3.2.1). Training and demonstrations will take place at community levels, targeting women, 
homestead owners, especially mothers or mothers-in law, school teachers, adolescents, school children, 
youth, and NGOs, The recipes can be demonstrated in nutrition trainings and in periodic nutrition fairs 
organized at events such as National Nutrition Week or the National Vegetable Fair. In these events, 
the raw ingredients and cooked dishes will be displayed side by side, to give a proper idea of the amount 
and portion sizes and cooked product. Recipe cards or sheets outlining the cooking method, with a list 
of ingredients used, nutritive values, serving size, cost, and indications of use for specific age groups 
may be distributed. Furthermore, video and audio recordings of the recipes being cooked can be 
promoted through mass media and online sources, notably, TV, Facebook, and YouTube. School 
nutrition activities such as Nutrition Clubs (NCs) or the Nutrition Challenge Badge (NCB) Initiative 
 
2 Namely: Bangladesh Breastfeeding Foundation (BBF), BIRTAN, DAE, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council 
(BARC), BARI, Bangladesh Institute of Research and Rehabilitation for Dishetes, Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders 
(BIRDEM), DLS, Department of Fisheries (DoF) 
'53 Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), 2016. Second Country Investment Plan for Nutrition-Sensitive Food Systems 
2016-20 (CIP2). Ministry of Food, Government of Bangladesh 
'TM Bhattacharjee L., $.K, Saha & B.K. Nandi. 2007. Food Based Nutrition Strategies in Bangladesh. DAE, MoA, UNDP and 
FAQ 
135 Institute of Public Health Nutrition (IPH), 2015. National Strategy on prevention and control of micronutrient deficiency, 
Bangladesh (2015-2024), Directorate General of Health Services. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Government of 
Bangladesh 
es 6 8 |

will also be practical vehicles through which youth and adolescents can learn about healthy cooking 
and nutrition which will go on to positively influence themselves and their families. 
 
3. Promote appropriate cooking techniques and safe food preparation (in line with NPAN2 
Key Action Area 6.3.3) 
Food-based nutrition training, BCC and mass media activities will be developed to encourage 
appropriate cooking techniques (Aol 2.3.1). The focus will be on key rules of healthy food preparation 
to reduce nutrient loss during processing and on ensuring hygiene and safety through hygienic food 
handling, storing, serving and consumption. Household preservation technologies such as pickling, sun 
drying and fermentation will be promoted to enhance shelf life of the product and conserve nutrients, 
Trainings and transfer of technologies on such topics and modules need to be scaled up through the 
DAE and upazila level agriculture extension services. 
 
4. Develop and promote tools for Nutrition Behaviour Change Communication (NBCC) 
food-based nutrition training and mass-media campaign (in line with NPAN2 Key Action 
Area 6.3.12) 
Given the evolving changes in methods of training and knowledge dissemination through virtual means, 
it is necessary to develop digitalized knowledge-based tools for online and social media (i.c. mobile 
phone-based messages or counselling, videos, messages, NCB e-leaming platforms) on NBCC. 
Evidence suggests that integrating NBCC with nutrition-sensitive interventions has a greater impact on 
nutrition outcomes. Such novel promotion tools will help accelerate the scaling up of BCC and mass- 
media campaigns needed to create mass awareness on nutrition and food safety. 
5. Promote food-based dictary guidelines with special focus on healthy dict and diversified 
food consumption (in line with NPAN2 Strategy 6.1.2.5, 6.1.3.3, 6.2.9, 6.3.13) 
 
 
 
Nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) tools such as the FBDG 
(updated as per Aol 3.1.1.) will be promoted. The Healthy Food Plate, which is developed based on 
FBDG as a nutrition counselling tool for pregnant women and the Healthy Mug using dietary diversity 
as a basis should be widely disseminated to enhance knowledge and practices on healthy diets across 
the country. A comprehensive coordinated multi-sectoral, multi-channel, advocacy, and communication 
strategy on nutrition in line with the National SBCC strategy needs to be developed and implemented. 
This should include orientation of the health care providers and extension workers on the FBDGs. These 
will provide dietary guidance messages to communicate to the public, what is the desirable food intake 
from a variety of food groups, correct serving sizes and wise food choices, It will also help understand 
nutrition labelling to discourage the consumption of "junk" foods. 
 
6. Promote nutritious and safe diets in food service institutions across formal and non- 
formal establishments 
It is essential to promote nutritious, and safe dicts at institutional levels in formal establishments such 
as restaurants, canteens, cafeterias of hotels, schools, colleges, universities, garment factories, prisons 
and in street food vending services across the informal sector. There is need to increase the nutritional 
and hygienic quality of food items served and sold to meet the diet and nutrient needs of clients at 
affordable prices, especially for the lower- and middle-income groups and urban dwellers. Training 
and demonstrations in healthy food preparation and food safety will be provided for cooks and inmates 
in prisons and correctional settings, prison shops, industrial catering facilities, self-cook facilities, or 
cafeterias and canteens in university, hostels and schools. Nutrition education and behaviour change 
interventions, gardening, inclusion of healthy choices in the prison shops and culinary training will be 
piggybacked with such activities. Prisoners can be trained to cook and clean for themselves with an 
emphasis placed on culinary education, healthy foods and self-sufficiency. Awareness raising activities 
on nutrition and food safety, training, advocacy and BCC for managers and cooks of hotels, 
restaurants, canteens and street vendors will require scaling up. To this end, CAB and BFSA will play 
an important role to promote dietary guidelines, food safety messages and implement the Safe Food 
ft 62

(Restaurant) Regulations, 2020 and Food Safety (Food Hygicne) Regulations 2018 developed under 
Bangladesh Safe Food Act, 2013 by BFSA (in line with Aol 5.1.2). 
Cross references 
© NFNSP Aof 1:2.1;-2.3-1.5 3.1.1;514.2;5:3,3._ 
* NFP CIP2 Programme II.1. Enhanced nutrition knowledge, promotion of good practices and 
consumption of safe and nutritious dict 
* NPAN2 Strategy 6.1.2.5 Promoting use of dietary guidelines for adults and elderly persons 
suffering from non-communicable diseases such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiac 
diseases and other; 6.1.3.3 - Major activities - Update Healthy Dietary Guidelines/protocols 
including focus on TB & HIV/AIDS, cancers, renal and hepatic diseases, etc, 
* NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.1. Strengthening of integrated homestead food production (fruits and 
vegetables, small livestock, aquaculture, comprebensive nutrition education) with emphasis on 
indigenous, underutilized and nutritious varictics/species/breeds) and gender sensitive and climate 
smart technologies; 6.2.9. Promoting of FBDG for healthy diet; 6.3.3. Promoting appropriate Infant 
and Young Child Feeding (TYCF) practices; 6.3.12. Developing a comprehensive, integrated Multi- 
channel PoA for SBCC with involvement of key relevant stakcholder; 6.3.13, Promoting FBDG 
with special focus on diversified food consumption. 
Aol 3.2.2, Scale-up integrated nutrition education strategies to enhance consumption of healthy, 
dicts, increase awareness of the nutricnt composition of local foods as well as to prevent and 
control malnutrition (underautrition and overnutrition) 
Rationale 
Lack of nutridion awareness, poor diet quality arid inadequate diversity are among the immediate causes 
of malnutrition, Dicts are largely cereal based, providing around 66% of the dictary energy, with 
consumption of animal source food, fruits and vegetables remaining below normative 
recommendations'. Cultural taboos, jack of nutrition awareness and gender inequity remain barriets 
that restrict the consumption of a healthy and diversified diet, especially for women and children, 
Integrating food-based nutrition education activities with agricultural and health interventions are 
shown to impact household diet quality, dietary diversity, and nutrition outcomes", With the country 
transiting to middic-income status, rapid urbanization and globalization are influencing the country's 
food culture: This has. increased the availability of cheaper, high calorie, low nutricnt-dense foods in the 
market that attract adolescents and youth. Increased intake of such foods contributes to a risk of 
overweight, obesity and dict-related discascs'*, It is critical to ensure adequate nutrition for children 
and adolescents as this is intrinsically linked to the health of future generations. Nutrition education 
strategies need to promote knowledge on the importance of local foods, its use in preparing healthy 
dicts and lifestyle approuches to prevent and control malnutrition among children, adolescents, and 
youth. 
 
© Ministry of Food, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare & FAG2015. Dietary guideline: for Bangladesh. Govemment 
oB 
'5 Saha, M., M.A. Mannan, & E, Bhattacharjee, 20/6. Mainstreaming Nutvition into Agricaltural Extension Services: Lessonu 
Learned from the Integrsicd Agricutture und Poultry Nutrition Projects in Bangladesh Published by the USAID funded 
Integrating Gendor and Nutrition within Agricultural Extension project, INGENAES. 
38 Akhter. A. & and J, Ghostlaw. 2019. Diversifying rice-cenmio agriculture and dicts: The Bangladesh. experience; tn 
Agriculture for improved nutrition: Seizing the mornntum. Chapter 15. Fan, Shenggen: Yosof, Sivan, Pandya-Lorch, Rajul 
(Ede;}, Wallingford, UK: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRE) and CABI, 
2° hopss/www. beph harvard. <divobesity -prevention-source/obesity-canses/diet-and-weight! 
ES 63 5 |

Action Agenda 
 
1. Integrate nutrition components with homestead food production (in alignment with 
NPAN2 Key Area of Intervention 6.2,1 and Aol 3.2.1) 
Diversified and integrated homestead food production, backyard poultry and small livestock, 
aquaculture linked with nutrition education/training need to be scaled up through farmer field schools, 
women farmer groups and village-based organizations, as part of dictary diversification. Nutrition 
education and training activities will be strengthened across the DoF and DLS to promote rearing of 
small indigenous species such as the vitamin A-rich mola carplet (Amblypharyngodon mola) and dhela 
(Osteobrama cotio), and local poultry and indigenous breeds of small livestock (see Aol 3.2.1), to 
enhance the production and consumption of animal source foods for nutrient adequacy of diets. 
2. Promote "adolescent nutrition and healthy lifestyle" through formal and informal 
academic curriculum/training and SBCC programs (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 
6.3.7 and Aol, 3.1.3) 
 
Formal and informal nutrition means to disseminate knowledge on healthy dicts and lifestyle to 
adolescents must be scaled up, Withm the purview of formal nutrition education, through orientation 
and trainings, school management staff and teachers will be made to understand the importance of 
dietary guidelines for improving diets, adopting correct food habits, healthy lifestyle, and improving 
the environment which in tum can enhance educational performance. Orientation and training on 
adolescent nutrition should be continued for relevant stakeholders in line with the National PoA for 
Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030. School teachers, parent teacher associations, agriculture 
extension and health officials who are engaged in nutrition outreach activities through sectoral services 
will also be targeted (see Aol 3.1.3). School-based informal education activities such as cooking 
demonstrations of nutrient-dense recipes (Aol 3.2.1) will be scaled up for SBCC programmes. These 
will be linked with wider platforms such as the Nutrition Club (NC), Community Support Groups, Girl 
Guides and Boy Scouts. The annual Nutrition Olympiad initiated with technical support from FAO and 
implemented through the MoFood, national NGOs and social enterprise agencies will be celebrated 
with wider engagement of the NC members and students, to build nutrition leadership and capacity 
among youth and adolescents through youth networks at national and regional levels. The NCB 
initiative will also be scaled up to help children and youth to learn about the importance of healthy food 
choices and lifestyles, food safety practices and how sustainable diets can help reduce impacts on our 
environment. Awareness creation on the effects of unhealthy processed and commercial foods on 
overweight and obesity and consequent NCDs is essential and is integral to the NCB initiative. The 
National Dietary Guidelines 2020 which include age-and disease specific guidelines will be promoted 
through school-based nutrition education programmes and NNS. The health seeking behaviour of 
adolescents, young and teenage couples will be enhanced through facility and community-based approaches 
linking with School health program/little Doctor program/Adolescent Reproductive & Sexual Health. 
 
3. Update nutrition curriculum (formal/informal) at different levels of academic institutions 
(in line with NPAN2 Key Area of Intervention 6.3.8 and 6.5.2) 
The nutrition curriculum for different levels of formal and informal academic learning will be updated 
with emphasis on both nutrition specific and nutrition-sensitive issues of public health significance. 
Besides, nutrition content of curricula in primary and secondary schools, medical and nursing 
institutions will be reviewed and updated. Key nutrition messages will be included in the cover and rear 
pages of the school text or exercise books to enhance exposure. A curriculum review will also be 
undertaken in collaboration with the MoE and the School Textbook Board, to ensure appropriate 
inclusion of nutrition education for both boys and girls, alike, Interactive e-learning nutrition material 
that has been developed from the NCB initiative is expected to be disseminated through an e-learning 
platform through MoFood 
 
la

Cross references 
NFNSP PoA Aol. 3,1.3.; Aol 3.2.1. 
NPAN2 Key action area 6.2,1. Strengthening of integrated homestead food production (fruits and 
vegetables, small livestock, aquaculture, comprehensive nutrition education) with emphasis on 
indigenous, underutilized, and nutritious varieties/species/breeds) and gender sensitive and climate 
smart technologies; 6.3.7. Promoting "Adolescent Nutrition and healthy lifestyle" through formal 
and informal academic curriculum/training program, and enhancing health seeking behaviour by 
adolescent/ young couples/teenage couples through facility and community-based approaches; 
6.3.8. Updating nutrition curriculum (formal/ informal) at different levels of academic institutions; 
6.5.2. Strengthening/integrating nutrition education in regular formal and informal curricula of 
primary and secondary educational institutions 
e National PoA for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030 
 Tian ee eee 
Bde 732) a ee 2 P= ty : > Thin ale 
Aol 3.3,1. Expand programs for immunization (EPI), control of acute respiratory infection (ARID, 
prevention of cholera and diarrhoeal diseases 
SS Wy SST EL 
food ») "~ t ' 
WS SS tu vy . 5, z * - Dh eta ie Sie entra Po " 
 
Rationale 
A strong relationship exists between malnutrition, infection, and child mortality, because poor nutrition 
leaves children underweight, weakened, and vulnerable to infections. Incomplete vaccination schedule 
is also strongly correlated with prevalence of underweight' In Bangladesh, the prevalence of ARI and 
diarrhoea among children under 5 in the last two weeks has been reported as 3% and 4.7% respectively, 
and only 86% of children age 12-23 months have received all basic vaccinations '', Suboptimal 
breastfeeding practices, inadequate complementary foods, poor anthropometric status along with food 
insecurity are identified as important risk factors for ARI and diarrhoea, '*'"* which are linked to 
greater morbidity via inadequate nutrient intake, all of which affect immune function. Contaminated 
complementary foods due to poor water and food quality, unclean cooking and serving utensils, 
inadequate handwashing practices' are also risk factors for diarrhoeal episodes'"*. Disparities in health 
secking behaviour among poor rural households along with weak execution of nutrition services within 
community based Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) and Primary Health Care 
(PHCs) have also been identified as additional challenges to addressing childhood illnesses. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Continue expanding child nutrition services via community based [MCI (in line with 
NFP PoA Key Area of Intervention 3.7 and NNS OP 10.A.10) 
The Government will seek to achieve universal coverage of IMCI to reach community level and hard- 
to-reach areas, A community-based prevention approach to malnutrition via integration and delivery of 
 
'4" Solis-Soto, M.T., D. Paudel & F, Nicoli, 2020. Relationship between vaccination and nutritional status in children, 
Demographic Research, January - June 2020, Vol. 42, pp. 1-14. 
'! BDHS 2017-2018 
'2 liah et al. BMC Pacdiatries .2019, Factors associated with diarrhoea and acute respiratory infection in children under two 
years of age in rural Bangladesh. 19:386 National Strategy on prevention and control of micronutrient deficiency, Bangladesh 
(2015-2024). Government of Bangladesh 
'3 Sultana M., A.R.Sarker, S.N. Akram R, AN. Mahumud et a/. 2019. Prevalence, determinants, and health care-secking 
behaviour of childhood acute respiratory tract infections in Bangladesh. PLoS ONE 14(1); e0210433. 
'4 Luby et af, Lancet Global Health. 2018, Effects of water quality, sanitation, handwashing, and nutritional interventions on 
diarrhoea and child growth in rural Bangladesh; a cluster randomised controlled trial. 6; ¢302-15. 
5 Mostafa ef.al, Acta Padiatrica. 2018. Children living in the slums of Bangladesh face risks from unsafe food and water and 
stunted growth is common. pp. 1230-1239 
es 6s fl

Essential Health Service Package (ESP) which includes nutrition services such as early initiation and 
six-month exclusive breastfeeding, timely initiation of complementary feeding, immunization, zinc 
therapy during diarrhoea, vitamin A supplementation, anaemia/ARI management and deworming of 
children should be prioritised within PHC and community clinics. Coverage of immunisation has tobe 
scaled up particularly in hard-to-reach Aaor and remote hilly areas, and in urban slums. NNS can 
provide support for technical interventions under IMCI which includes development and delivery of 
training modules, capacity building and monitoring implementation of technical interventions. 
 
2. Strengthen social behaviour change communication (SBCC) to promote consumption of 
safe food and water for healthy diets and nutrition of children (in line with the 8FYP, 
NNS OP 10.4.2, NPAN2 6.4.4., CIP2 Programme V.1.4. and NFPNSP Strategy 5.1) 
Positive nutrition practices will be promoted through SBCC and sensitisation on uptake of essential 
nutrition services as well as on food safety and healthy diet (see Aol 3.2.2.), and related complementary 
issues such as water and sanitation, EPI, and prevention of NCDs by public and private facilities. 
Joint intersectoral actions such as the development and procurement of BCC materials, promotion of 
mass-media campaigns, national nutrition events, technical support to other Operational Plans (OPs), 
development of policy guidelines and coordination with NGOs/other stakeholders involved in the 
implementation of BCC activities, can help build a momentum around health secking behaviour among 
communities, Demand for safe food and water must be created through increased awareness among 
adolescents, pregnant and lactating women. Hygiene and sanitation interventions should be coupled 
with food safety education and consumer awareness among food preparers in the household, school 
children and men who often take care of food shopping. Women should be especially prioritized for 
BCC given their multiple roles in the household - preparing the food, distributing it, feeding children, 
storage and preservation, especially in the case of preparing and processing complementary to feed prevent 
the microbial contamination through unhygienic handling of food and water. The production and 
dissemination of materials on food safety through the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS) 
and the Directorate General of Family Planning should be continued, adapted, and also disseminated to 
DLS, DoF and DAE. Televised messages should go beyond public service messaging and can be 
incorporated in existing children's programmes, local folklore and popular serials, to help strengthen 
the scale up of BCC, The BCC work undertaken by the Bangladesh Food Safety Network (BFSN) 
should be expanded and integrated efforts made to create public awareness about food hygiene, to 
enhance overall nutrition improvement of children and reduce morbidity. 
 
 
3. Strengthen research collaborations to better understand infection-malnutrition 
interactions 
Infections are common in the first two years of life and an integrated view of health and food systems 
is critical for an understanding of the influence of nutritional homeostasis for health and well-being. As 
we begin to understand the immune response and the intestinal microbiota, the mechanisms through 
which they influence nutrition and child growth remain unclear'. The impact of infection and sub- 
clinical conditions on nutrition and child growth/development (including birth outcome), and the 
interactions between nutrition and infection also need to be better understood. Research collaborations 
will be explored with academia and agencies such as icddr,b who undertake advanced studies in this 
area and further explore the effects of environmental enteropathy and malabsorption on nutritional 
interventions and early growth/development, Additionally, understanding the impact of scaling up 
prevention and control measures of infections in malnourished children/populations, or those at risk of 
becoming malnourished is essential. 
Cross references 
NFNSP PoA Aol 3,2.2.; Strategy 5.1, 
NFP PoA (2008-2015) Aol 3.7, Women and children's health 
SFYP 2020-2025 
 
\4¢ Belkaid Y ef al.2014, Role of the Microbiota in Immunity and inflammation, Cell, 2014 Mar 27; 157(1): 121-141 
ll

« CIP2 Programme V.1.4. Enhance food safety education, consumer awareness and food safety 
networks 
* NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.4.4. To combat different types of infection (diarrhoea, pneumonia, 
environmental enteropathy) that adversely affect child nutrition, motivate people to follow 
hygiene practices, especially washing hands with soap 
e NNS Operational Plan Priority Interventions and Activities A2. BCC to Promote Good 
Nutritional Practices; A10. Coordination with IMCI program 
Aol 3.3.2. Strengthen the implementation of National Nutrition Services (NNS) delivery 
integrated with community clinics targeting children and women suffering from persistent 
weakness and micronutrient deficiencies 
Rationale 
Micronutrient deficiencies can have major adverse health consequences, contributing to impairments in 
growth, immune competence, cognitive development and poor reproductive outcomes. The first 1000 
days of life serves as a critical window to reverse the situation by nutrition interventions. In 2011-12, 
over 50% children of 6 to 59 months of age reported zine deficiency, while 2 in 5 preschool children 
and 71.5% of non-pregnant and non-lactating women reported vitamin D deficiency'*', Subsequent 
studies have indicated that a significant proportion of preschool-age children showed deficiencies in 
vitamin A (20.5 %), zine (44.5 %) and vitamin D (39.6 %); about a third of these children are also 
anaemic, and 10,7 % of the children are iron deficient. A high proportion of non-pregnant and non- 
lactating women are deficient in zine (57 %) and iodine (42 %), while one-quarter of women live with 
anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiencies!** The aetiology of micronutrient deficiencies is multi- 
factorial, with household food insecurity, poor quality diets, lack of nutrition awareness, intra 
household food disparity, along with genetic, parasitic and infectious diseases, all Playing a 
role'*'. Despite the situation, the coverage of micronutrient supplementation remains low!*'. 
Critical challenges relating to service delivery at community levels for iron-folic acid supplementation 
for lactating women and adolescent girls and for multiple micronutrient powder for 6-23 month-olds 
have also been identified'. Similarly, though calcium supplementation during pregnancy has been 
included in the NNS operational plan (OP), the modality of service delivery has remained undefined. 
Action Agenda 
1, Strengthen availability of dietary data for vulnerable groups suffering from 
micronutrient deficiencies 
 
 
Dietary diversity as measured by Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women (MDD-W) is a proxy 
indicator of diet quality and micronutrient adequacy in the diet. Those who consume at least five or 
more of the ten food groups daily have a greater likelihood of meeting the requirement for 11 
micronutrients'** of which four are of public health importance. Unlike the MAD or MDD for children, 
MDD-W is not the covered by the major national level surveys or assessments. For example, it is not 
included in BDHS, Bangladesh Maternal Mortality and Health Care Survey (BMMS) or Sample Vital 
Registration System (SVRS) which focus on health indicators, HTES discuss dietary diversity of 
households, but do not provide gender disaggregated data nor ranges of food group data. Due to 
unavailability of appropriate national data on MDD-W, an update on dietary adequacy of micronutrients 
 
\4? ieddr,b UNICEF, GAIN and IPHN, 2013. National Micronutrient Status Survey 2011-2012 Final Repon; this figure is 
based on serum vitamin D levels < 50. 0 nml/L 
48 Ahmed, F,, Prendivillc, N., & Narayan, A. 2016. Micronutrient deficiencies among children and women in Bangladesh: 
Progress and challenges. Journal of Nutritional Science 
'*9 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 2017. Op. cit. 
'® World Bank. 2015. Bangladesh Nations! Nutrition Services. Assessment of Implementation 
Status 
! World Bank, 2015. Op. cit, 
'? Vitamin A, Thiamine (B1), Riboflavin (B2), Niacin (B3), Pyridoxine (B6), Folate (B9), Cyanocobalamin (B12), Vitamin 
C, Calcium, Iron, and Zinc. 
es 6 I!

among women of reproductive age is not avaialable nor has it received the required attention'. 
Population-weighted, nationally representative nutritional and dietary data on adolescent boys and girls 
is lacking and should be reported by disaggregated sub-populations, to provide better programmatic 
guidance on addressing micronutrient deficiencies'. Indicators that measure gender disaggregated 
dietary diversity must be incorporated into national surveys and nutrition portals such as the National 
Information Platform for Nutrition (NIPN) and Nutrition Information and Planning Unit (NIPU) and 
Food Security and Nutrition Information Systems (FSNIS) for regular monitoring. 
 
2. Promote food-based approaches within programs to combat micronutrient malnutrition 
(in line with NMDCS Strategic Area 3,].2) 
To enhance availability of micronutrient rich foods, production and consumption of small livestock, 
poultry, eggs, dairy, fisheries and horticulture can be promoted, Integrating nutrition education with 
production strategies should be encouraged, ensuring the produce is not only sold for cash but consumed 
by households/individuals at high risk of micronutrient deficiencies. Field linkages between agriculture 
relevant departments (DAE, DoF and DoL.) and DGHS will be strengthened for increasing productivity 
and consumption of micronutrient rich foods that contribute to healthy and sustainable diets. 
Government policies and programmes will be directed towards the goal of increasing production of and 
access to micronutrient rich foods, in combination with marketing and education strategies built into 
micronutrient interventions to improve their consumption. As part of nutrition-sensitive approaches, 
innovative programmes on nutrition-sensitive food systems such as integrated household farming, and 
promoting home-based beneficial traditional practices for improving micronutrient intake 
(incorporating dietary enhancers such as lemon, tamarind, sour fruits and related ingredients in 
preparations and reducing inhibitors of micronutrient absorption in plant-based diets through roasting, 
soaking, germination, fermentation) will be recommended. Bio-fortification of zinc and vitamin A in 
crops that are ongoing strategies, need scaling up (Aol! 1.1.1.). Promotion of home gardening through 
women-centred community actions in at least two-thirds of households linked with community clinics, 
nutrition training through farmer field schools and improving access to high quality seeds (Aol. 1.1.5), 
tools and materials can play a role in improving the micronutrient status of communities. Integrated 
horticulture strategies from upazila to union levels along with establishing school gardening should also 
be promoted in line with relevant national programmes. 
 
 
3. Accelerate mainstreaming of nutrition services within the proposed delivery platforms of 
NNS 
For improved child nutrition, coverage and outreach of iron supplementation (micronutrient powder) 
should be accelerated through community based IMCI and community clinics. Similarly, other 
micronutrients of public health importance like Vitamin D and calcium supplementation should also be 
mainstreamed within nutrition services, Several delivery platforms have already been proposed under 
the NNS OP for mainstreaming iron folic acid supplementation to PLW and adolescent girls, 
deworming for adolescent girls and post-partum vitamin A supplementation, within the community 
clinics. However, there are too many intervention areas in the original OP for NNS to deal effectively 
within the required time span. A smaller set of actionable interventions can lead to a clarity of 
implementation needs for each intervention-delivery platform. Multisectoral feasibility assessments, 
technical review missions, and other learning approaches will be integrated to assess the delivery of a 
few priontised interventions for combating micronutrient deficiencies. 
 
Aol 3.3.3. Scale up the supply and use of safe water for consumption and domestic use 
Rationale 
Safe drinking water is a prerequisite for utilization of food for nutrition. Industrial discharges, municipal 
waste, agrochemicals, salinity intrusion and arsenic contamination all contribute to water pollution in 
 
'S3 Bangladesh National Nutrition Council, 2020, Assessment of the Key Bottlenecks for the Coverage of Nutrition Sensitive 
Interventions and the Underlying Causes 
'* GAIN, 2018. Adolescent nutrition in Bangladesh. Dhaka. Bangladesh. 
ec zz

Bangladesh'**. Continuous build-up of arsenic in the soil from contaminated irrigation water reduces 
crop yields and impacts agricultural sustainability and food safety'. Arsenic in the food chain poses a 
dietary risk to human health in addition to the risk from drinking contaminated groundwater"'. 
Contamination with manganese, chloride and iron also reduces the quality of drinking water. While 
98% of households have access to basic drinking water, it is overwhelmingly contaminated with E-coli 
at source and household levels, including amongst the richest households'*, Frequent leakage of 
pipelines could be reason for contamination of water along with adding to water wastage. Inequitable 
water access particularly among informal settlements in terms of insufficient water, intermittent water 
supply and inflated water rates due to illegal supply are other challenges adding to the water woes 
in urban slums'*', Limited investments in infrastructure development related to water treatment 
facility, water storage, transmission and distribution network also limit access to clean water'®. Almost 
a quarter of households spend more than 30 minutes each day collecting water, with women and young 
girls (90%) largely responsible for water collection. Difficulty in accessing safe water for drinking and 
household use impacts women's empowerment by increasing time spent on searching for safe water, 
thereby mitigating their engagement in productive endeavours. Lack of access to safe water impinges 
on household healthcare and increases the houschold's expenses and women's time in providing care 
services. The limited capacity of the Department of Environment as a monitoring and enforcing body 
on water quality along with limited resources and water testing facilities are also factors that severely 
undermine the quality of available water'®'. 
Action Agenda 
1. Promote nationwide supply of safe water to impact household nutrition 
The PP2041 plans to achieve 100% and 50% tap water connectivity to urban and rural households 
respectively by 2041. Introducing water supply projects in urban areas and installing piped water supply 
for the urban poor will constitute an important area of intervention. Private sector investment will be 
explored to support for scaling up the provision of safe water from the water source to the point of 
consumption, including in-house handling, for piped and non-piped water supply systems', The 
number of tube wells in rural areas (currently one for every ten households) will be increased and water 
supply options will be installed to minimize arsenic contamination, excessive iron and salinity, in 
consonance with interventions proposed in the 8FYP, Emphasis will be on underserved, unserved and 
hard-to-reach areas which are the malnutrition hotspots'. The provision of safe adequate water in 
healthcare facilities is imperative to prevent infections and spread of disease, protect staff and patients, 
and "uphold the dignity of vulnerable populations including pregnant women and the disabled"'TM. 
Provision of safe water supply and training on safe water use will be provided to schools towards 
promoting hygienic habits in learning environments to allow children to make the most out of their 
education through better health. Within emergency programming, self-supply and distribution of Water, 
Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) items (home water treatment products, soap and hand washing 
stations) to the households of undernourished children/PLW is another relevant activity that could be 
undertaken within the framework of WASH and nutrition integrated programming towards reducing 
water borne diseases and fatality among children. 
 
 
 
'5$ General Economics Division, 2020. Eighth Five Year Plan July 2020, Bangladesh Planning Commission, Government of 
Bangladesh 
'% Heikens, A, 2006. Arsenic contamination of irrigation water, soil and crops in Bangladesh: Risk implications for sustainable 
agriculture and food safety in Asin, FAO, Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok. 
'87 MICS 2019 
158 Thi. 
' BIGD 2019. State of Cities 2018: Water Governance in Dhaka. BRAC Institute of Governance and Development (BIGD), 
BRAC University. 
© World Bank. 2019. Bangladesh Municipal Water Supply and Sanitation Project. 
'®! General Economics Division. 2020, Eighth Five Year Plan July 2020. Bangladesh Planning Commission. Government of 
Bangladesh 
'@1_oval Government Division. 2014, National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation 2014, Ministry of Local Government, 
Rural Development and Cooperatives. Government of Bangladesh 
'* Integrated Phase Classification (IPC) Report 2020 
'* WHO/UNICEF (2015). Water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities: status in low- and middle-income countries 
and way forward. 
es « |

2. Promote the importance of safe drinking water for prevention of diseases 
Awareness raising campaigns along with emotional/social drivers will be conducted towards ensuring 
attention to the issue of safe water supply (see Aol 5.1.3), Research findings show a 40% stronger 
protective effect for water quality interventions at the household level than at source level on diarrheal 
disease outcomes'®, To remove coliform and other pathogens and enable good quality of water for 
drinking purposes, effective low-cost "point of use" traditional interventions will be promoted, notably: 
boiling, chlorination, solar disinfection, UV radiation, SONO', filtration, traditional filtration, 
combined chemical coagulation and flocculation'®', Household water treatment and safe storage for 
improved dicts and nutrition should take into account all steps in the water chain'TM. Increasing water 
quantity available to households can be enhanced by promoting more storage facilities and rainwater 
collection jars/containers to increase the quantity of water delivered, the frequency of water available 
and the amount of water used at household level, all factors that influence health. 
 
3. Support R&D on under-explored areas related to impacts of contaminated water on food 
safety 
Water quality monitoring (arsenic and saline screening) and surveillance programmes along with R&D 
on appropriate and affordable technologies will be undertaken for scaling up safe drinking water 
availability. Efforts will be made to upgrade the capacity of Pourashavas'® and Water Supply and 
Sewerage Authority (WASA) for planning, designing, implementation and management of urban water 
supply, Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) will have appropriate institutional linkage 
for this purpose. Underexplored areas of research and knowledge gaps related to unavailability of data 
on arsenic in livestock and freshwater fisheries limit our understanding of the risks of arsenic to animal 
health and the safety of food products from these sectors. Reliable human health risk assessments for 
arsenic in foods also cannot be made currently, There is inadequate information on the risks of arsenic 
in water and fodder to livestock and their food products'"', Innovative research to inform the uptake of 
nutrition-sensitive interventions like use of saline water for fish/shrimp farming, rice farming and 
planting of saline-tolerant fruit trees such as guava, jackfruit, sapodilla, hog plum,and pomelo,will help 
mitigate the effects of saline water intrusion and its impact on food production and consumption. 
Cross references 
e NFNSP Aol 5.1.3. 
¢ 8FYP 2020-2025 
Aol 3.3.4, Improve sanitary facilities and hygiene practices, including the prevention of animal to 
human transmission of disease and prevention and control of food and water-borne illness 
Rationale 
Poor sanitation and hygiene have a synergistic effect on malnutrition with infectious disease, especially 
diarrhoea exacerbating the situation. Inadequate sanitation and hygiene cost Bangladesh an estimated 
of USD 4.23 billion, which is 6.3% of its GDP'"'. Unhygienic practices among food handlers with 
regard to cooking and processing of foods coupled with unsanitary environments in restaurants and 
fast-food outlets in Bangladesh's food industry is common. According to estimates from icddr,b, and 
WHO, at least 501 peopie in Bangladesh visit hospitals every day for diarrhoeal diseases that are related 
 
' Brown J., S. Caimeross, JH. Ensink. 2013. Water, sanitation, hygiene and enteric infections in children. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood; 98:629-634 
st The SONO filter is patented as the "Arsenic Removal Filter" (Patent No. 1003935, 2002) with the Department of Patents, 
Design and Trademarks of Bangladesh 
6? WASH' NUTRITION (2017). A practical guidebook on increasing nutritional impact through integration of WASH and 
Nutrition programmes, Action Against Hunger and UNICEF, 
'6* Water chain -source, collection and transport, treatment, storage and use. 
" Local government municipalities of Bangladesh 
TM FAO. 2006. Arsenic contamination of irrigation water, soil and crops in Bangladesh: Risk implications for sustainable 
agriculture and food safcty in Asis. Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 
"! Water and Sanitation Program. 2012. Economic Impacts of Inadequate Sanitation in Bangladesh, Flagship Report 
a

to issues of food safety'". Inadequate solid waste management whereby only between 44 and 76% 
of the total municipal solid waste is currently being collected, creates an unhygienic environment that 
puts human health at risk. Furthermore, an estimated 20% of highly infectious biomedical waste often 
ends up in the sewage systems which can lead to various communicable diseases'", Transmission of 
diseases from animals to humans also has negative consequences on nutritional status of those infected. 
Diseases in animals impact the quantity and quality of food produced, such as meat and milk. Inadequate 
animal shelters and faulty animal faeces disposal are common reasons for contamination of the 
household environment, Faccal contamination of play areas and feeding environments reported in 66% 
of households has been a major source of environmental enteropathy among young children'"*, 
Likewise, microbial contamination of milk and eggs, acute toxicity due to aflatoxins and chemical 
residues in foods are other food safety threats that impact child nutrition'®. Unhygienic animal 
handling, inadequate animal health and veterinary services coupled with a lack of "soft" skills in 
livestock programmes are additional challenges'"*. Animal disease surveillance and control needs to be 
scaled up and targeted for maximum effect of actions on prevention of food and water borne illness'"'. 
Action Agenda 
1. Ensure sanitary and hygienic handling of food at household and community levels with 
regard to food production, processing, storage, preparation 
 
 
To minimise risks of food contamination, action will be needed at all stages of the food chain from 
"farm to: fork" delivery points. Trainings and demonstrations will be provided to DLS extension 
officials at subnational levels (see Aol 1.1.2). Appropriate animal husbandry and veterinary services 
will be scaled up, and steps taken for careful clinical examination of the health of animals, sanitary, 
hygienic handling and slaughter, safe transport and monitoring, inspection of carcass and analysis, 
processing, storage and distribution at markets. Integrity of the cold chain and verification of hygiene, 
and finally at the consumption level where safe animal food is provided to the consumer, are critical 
points that will be adhered to. At the consumption level, training, education and sensitization/promotional 
activities will be promoted among food handlers (at household level and at eateries) for safe, sanitary 
and hygienic food handling practices, cooking and preservation, safe storage and protective display 
that are crucial to reducing microbial contamination in food and preventing animal to human 
disease transmission following WHO's 5 keys to safer foods''® (see Aol 5.1.3). Promotional 
community mobilization activities focusing on personal hygiene, and importance of handwashing 
will also be emphasized. 
 
2. Promote measures to ensure health of animals for safe diets (in line with CIP2 Priority 
Intervention 1.3.4 and 8FYP) 
Promoting development of protective poultry housing'" and animal shelter is a two-pronged approach 
to prevent transmission of diseases from animals to humans. Implementation of these simple procedures 
and measures will prevent entry of disease agents into a farm or the exit of the disease agent from 
 
'? Ali, A, 2013, Food Safety and Public Health Issues in Bangiadesh: A Regulatory Concem. European Food and Feed Law 
Review, 8(1), 31-40 
'} General Economics Division. 2020. Eighth Five Year Plan July 2020, Bangladesh Planning Commission. Government of 
Bangladesh 
'TM Neure F.M., B.M. Reid BM, J.H. Humphrey, M.N. Mbuya, G, Pelto & R.J, Stoltzfus. 2014, Water, sanitation, and hygiene 
(WASH), environmental enteropathy, nutrition, and early child development: making the links, Ann N Y Acad Sct. Jan; 
1308:1 18-28. 
> FAO, 2020. Nutrition and livestock - Technical guidance to harness the potential of livestock for improved nutrition of 
vulnerable populations in programme planning. Rome. 
76 World Organization for Animal Health OiE. 2015. PVS GAP analysis Mission Report. Bangladesh 
77 Hill et al. 2018. The impact of surveillance and control on highly pathogenic avian influenza outbreaks in poultry in Dhaka 
division, Bangladesh. Research Article. PLOS Computational Biology 
'® Keep clean, separate raw and cooked food, cook thoroughly, keep food at safe temperature and use safe water and raw 
materials 
'* Such housing entails adequate ventilation, sanitary shelter, adequate drainage, enough space along with wholesome and 
adequate food and water. 
es 7 I!

infected premises. Such measures will also ensure that animals remain in containment zones, thereby 
reducing human exposure to animal faecal contamination in domestic environments. Interventions 
promoting animal welfare management will also be necessary to ensure healthier animals which in turn 
contribute to safe animal source foods for healthier diets. Policy support'TM will be provided to scale up 
the development and delivery of private and community-based veterinary services, including diagnostic 
centres, clinics, and hospitals. An autonomous quality control agency will be established to ensure 
quality of veterinary drugs, vaccines, feeds, feed ingredients and breeding tools and materials along 
with adherence to treatment and bio-security guidelines along the principles of "one health" (see Aol 
1.1.8). Measures will be taken to extend veterinary services up to union level with adequate service 
providers and infrastructure facilities. Efforts to prevent transmission will be made through DLS, 
animal husbandry and veterinary services. Existing resources will be devoted to these joint activities 
including laboratory analysis, surveillance, and outbreak investigation. Field capacity for detecting 
transboundary animal diseases will be strengthened and a network of laboratories will be established 
with capacity for receiving and analysing specimens for the diseases (see Aol 5.1.1.). 
 
3. Establish and promote garbage disposal and recycling of waste for environmental 
hygiene and human health protection 
For management of solid waste, cost-effective interventions involving waste reduction programmes and 
recycling strategies are identified as a priority. This will be complemented with tax rebates and financial 
incentives for the production of environmentally friendly products, including energy efficient 
appliances, recycled materials and sustainable paper products. The public sector alone cannot handle 
the large service gaps related to safe disposal of garbage. It will therefore be incentivised for investment 
in solid waste recycling. Improved waste management which includes proper collection, segregation 
for reuse, recycles and environmentally sound disposal will be promoted. Capacity building of 
concerned stakeholders, public awareness campaigns, strengthening monitoring and enforcement'*! and 
preparing waste management master plans for improved waste disposal will be implemented. In 
addition, in line with WHO protocols, the government will develop a standard medical waste 
management policy and strategy to highlight the management of the waste generated at different health- 
care facilities. The policy will build awareness within hospital staff, the public, waste pickers, and 
tokai'TM about the risks involved and proper segregation procedures. Government and private hospitals 
will establish central incinerators system with the their own human resources. Improved communication and 
sharing of information about the risks from medical waste among all stakeholders is important, and 
public awareness will be necessary to activate government policy and public demand for proper 
treatment and human health protection. 
Cross references 
NFNSP Aol 1.1.2; 1.1.8; 5.1.1.; 5.1.3. 
8FYP 2020-2025 
CIP2 Priority Intervention 1.3.4 
Strategic Plan of BFSA (2016-2021 )- Draft 
Bangladesh CIP for Environment, Forestry and Climate Change (2016-2021): priority 
investment area under sub-programme 2.2.1 
 
189 Synergy for all activities will be established with the ongoing World Bank-supported Livestock and Dairy Development 
Project Project, 
' In line with priority investment orea under sub-programme 2.2.1 of the Bangladesh Country Investment Plan for 
Environment, Forestry and Climate Change (2016-2021) 
2 Garbage collectors 
 
a

5. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 4 of the PoA 
Objective 4: To increase access to nutrition-sensitive social protection and safety nets across 
 
lifecycle with a focus on vulnerable groups and regions 
Strategy 4.1. Improve management of the public food stock and distributio 
Aol 4.1.1. Inform decision-making and improve planning for price support to farmers, market 
stabilization and public food distribution 
Rationale 
 
Food price volatility can deter farmers from making investments in more efficient technologies, 
mechanization and GAP. Low prices can even dissuade them from growing food altogether, The impact 
of price volatility is likely to be acute on poor and vulnerable people which can Icad to political 
instability. Rice price volatility is often cyclic with, for example, a reduction in farmers' income during 
harvest time or periods of glut. For the most vulnerable, the worst time is the pre-boro harvest period 
of March-April, which is usually associated with a seasonal food price peak. In response to this, the 
Government needs to support farmers' prices while continuing to ensure access of staple food by the 
most vulnerable at all times by stabilizing prices and distributing food through the Public Food 
Distribution System (PFDS) when required. To ensure effective implementation of the public food 
management activities, the NFNSP proposes to maintain stocks of 1.05 million metric tons of foodgrain 
at the beginning of the financial year with due consideration to the seasonal changes in government 
procurement and distribution needs. Domestic rice procurement is the instrument used to build rice 
stocks for the PFDS and notably OMS for price stabilization purposes at consumer level, but also the 
one to maintain a floor price to support farmers (see Ao! 2.1.3). Deciding when, how much, and at what 
price to procure foodgrain from farmers such that the market remains competitive and the price is 
profitable for farmers while fulfilling PFDS requirements even in unpredictable times of disasters and 
emergencies, is a challenge the Government faces on a seasonal basis. Anticipating the role that public 
and private imports should have in rice price stabilization, especially in the case of domestic production 
shortfalls, is also a complex process. This Aol proposes measures to make decision-making more 
efficient. In addition to foodgrain, the Government recognizes the need to widen the nature of the food 
distributed to include nutritious foods, to enhance dietary diversity among the most vulnerable sections 
of the population. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Improve monitoring of foodgrain prices, stock, domestic production, and imports to 
inform procurement and PFDS decisions 
FPMU compiles several reports'*? based on available information from different inter-ministerial 
agencies and institutions - DAM for prices, DAE and BBS for production data, Directorate of Food for 
stocks, and Bangladesh Bank for imports- which guide Government decisions. Efforts will be made to 
improve data exchange notably by setting up an inter-agency FNS data sharing mechanism as proposed 
in Aol 5.3,1. Novel and more reliable approaches to estimating private stocks also need to be devised 
as this is essential in the government's decisions with regards to procurement and foodgrain distribution. 
 
2. Harness the potential of big data analytics to assess foodgrain availability, estimate 
required foodgrain imports, set procurement prices and amounts and plan PFDS 
The potential of big data analytics will be harnessed (as proposed under Aol 5.3.2) to monitor all 
required variables needed to plan and make forecasts towards planning, procurement and PFDS. For 
 
'83 The daily Bangladesh Food Situation Report, the Fortnightly Foodgrain Outlook and the Quarterly Food Situation Report. 
a 73 ||

example, simultaneous analysis of large sets of PFDS information can be carried out t support real- 
time decisions, Capacities - notably of FPMU, will be strengthened to apply modern IC'T-based 
analysis and forecasting. Reliable forecasts will enable the use of the FAO's FPMA Tool that provides. 
an advanced technical solution for dissemination and analysis of price information to monitor the food 
security xitustion and alerts ugaingt emerging food shortages. Public and private imports can help 
miusintain required buffer stocks when domestic production ts insufficient or procurement targets unmet. 
They can alse help respond to. sudden needs such as in the case of disasters, However, excess imports' 
van have a negative impsct on domestic production, Mamtaining an appropriate balunce between public 
interventions and international markets requires building strony analytical capebilities'TM. Sute of the 
art methodologies to estimate foodgrain availability, and production will be adopted, 
3. Review the methodology to set the precurement price and amounts 
 
 
The way procurement prices and amounts are set will be reviewed, in light of recent oxpericnces and 
other countries' successful practices. An effort will be made to understand the factors that may hinder 
successful procurement and what measures could be taken to alleviate them, For example, the additional 
costs faced by farmers to sell to the Government through procurement (¢.g,, the humidity gradient 
constraint to-suit PFDS storage) should be adequatety built in the procurement price so that production 
and post-production costs (e.g, transport to procurement centre) ate covered by the set procurement 
price. | 
4. Develop an loterministerial coordination mechanism to support decisions 
 
 
An inter-ministeri#l coordination mechanism is to be developed for harmonizing the daw und 
information on food grain production, prices, stocks and imports for a more efficient, integrated and 
analytical support to the PFDS. 
5, Adapt PFDS to National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) priorities and changing 
approaches to social safety net programmes 
The gradual shift towards cash-based social safety net programmes for greater <fficiency needs 10 be 
acknowledged and taken into secount in planning for the medium and Jonger terms in line with the 
NSSS and its PoA. 
6. Plan to include nutritious foods under the PFDS 
 
 
 
 
In response to. the first wave of COVID-19 in 2020, as part of targeted safety net programmes, packages 
of fortified rice, rice flékes, lentils, molasses, fortified biscuits, and oil were distributed to bridge the 
nutrient gap of poorer sections of the population, Guidelines will be propared to amend the PFDS 
permanently - learning from the COVID-19 experience, to include nutritious foods in uddition to 
foodgrain to the basket distributed or sold at subsidized prices. The possibility of including dried fish 
will be-explored. Which sections of the population it will support will nocd to be decided based on an 
assessment of the needs of and benefits to the recipients as well as the cost and complexity of 
openitionalization, 
Cross references 
« NENSP Aol 2.1.3; 5.3.1; 5.3.2 
* NSSS PoA 
 
'TM DAL 2018. Food Reserves: Using food reserves (o onltance fod aed netriton xecurity in doveboping countried Case Studios. 
October 
Cl -_-

Aol 4.1.2, Enhance the management of procurement, public food stocks and price stabilization 
activities and implement a nutrition-sensitive PFDS 
Rationale 
The role of the PFDS is to provide relief during emergency periods of natural disasters and targeted 
food distributions to alleviate chronic food insecurity. As described in Aol 4.1.1., the public 
procurement program is the major instrument for building foodgrain stocks for PFDS although it is 
also used to provide incentives to farmers by supporting prices (see also Aol 2.1.3). The Government 
has calculated the need for }.05 million metric tons public foodgrain stock to made available at the 
beginning of each financial year in order to be able to handle PFDS activities. This ts the equivalent 
of three months' distribution requirement of 0.6. million metric tons in additionto an emergency 
reserve of 0.45 million metric tons. Procurement targets and objectives are not always met as 
hindrances to smooth procurement implementation exist; procurement centers can be out of reach, 
the requirements with regards to moisture content of paddy are challenging for farmers to comply 
with, and centers are sometimes unwilling to accept small amounts from farmers'®. This Aol aims to 
make procurement and food distribution more efficient by providing information to the different 
stakeholders for enhanced decision-making, be it from the farmers or the consumers. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Provide better information to farmers 
 
Making foodgrain prices readily available to producers and consumers can help them make informed 
decision, Farmers will be able to decide whether to plant for the next season and whether to participate 
in the procurement drive, While DAM provides this information on a daily basis, digital display boards 
will be introduced in marketplaces for everyone to access live information. Other means of 
dissemination may be looked into, making use of ICTs (¢.g., through mobile applications). In order to 
encourage farmer participation in the procurement drive, producers need to be educated on the 
required standards notably with regard to moisture content. 
 
2. Increase the number of procurement centres 
 
The coverage of the procurement is only 6 % of the total production, this needs to be expanded to 
provide price incentives to the producers. Decentralisation of the number of procurement centres may 
be looked into for enhanced farmer participation' although this should not lead to inefficiencies in the 
procurement system!** 
 
3. Expand the use of the digital applications developed for the monitoring of procurement 
 
A Krishoker App has been piloted to relieve the complexity of existing manual procedures in the rice 
procurement system. Farmers apply to participate in the procurement drive and the computer system 
selects a fixed number of them through a lottery system. Besides, the Directorate of Food has introduced 
an inspection report management software, foodgrain movement programming software, and food 
database to help oversee the foodgrain procurement, distribution and stock management. The system 
also provides a facility to devise national procurement targets and determine procurement targets for 
individual farmers/rice mills accurately. The web-based foodgrain procurement management system 
in place allows to gauge the procurement status of paddy/rice across the country at any point in time. 
These initiatives will be rolled out. 
 
'% Krishi Gobeshona Foundation. 2019. Assessment of Foodgrain Procurement System in Bangladesh: Implications for Policy. 
Publication 1.28 
18° Thid. 
Be

4, Ensure suitable legislation and legislative mechanisms are in place for efficient foodgrain 
procurement 
The Government will ensure that suitable legislative mechanisms are in place to discourage and prevent 
speculative hoarding of food and the creation of artificial shortages,and their enforcement will be 
monitored. Rice millers have been shown to sometimes benefit much more than farmers from 
procurement drives'*' and sometimes do not honour the agreement made with the Government to supply 
rice through the procurement programme!' Legislation may have to be reviewed to prevent such 
situations from occurring. To this effect, the Internal Food grain Procurement Act 2017 may be updated 
as required. 
 
5. Enhance the monitoring of food distribution and management of stocks 
The COVID-19 epidemic pointed to the acute need to closely monitor food distribution: an IFPRI 
survey uncovered vast leaks in the subsidized rice programs for the extremely poor -the Food Friendly 
Programme (FFP), Presently, several [CT-based management systems are used in the implementation 
of the PFDS, but they are not interlinked. A transparent surveillance system needs to be devised to 
monitor food distribution and stocks across the country. Public food stock management involves 
monitoring stock movement, stock rotation, and storage and transit losses. By further enhancing the 
existing digitalized system, leakage in the process of foodgrain storage and stock maintenance can be 
minimized. 
A modem technology-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is required to manage the 
activities of the PFDS under one umbrella to ensure the food security for poor and vulnerable people. 
6. Develop systems to roll out nationally the distribution of non foodgrain foods through 
PFDS 
 
 
Once plans have been made on the modalities to distribute nutritious foods as part of the PFDS basket 
(see Aol 4.1.1), systems will be developed to implement them. Different regional settings may have 
different requirements. 
Cross references 
@ NFNSP Aol! 2.1.3: 4.1.1 
Aol 4.1.3, Ensure adequate storage of foodgrain, maintaining quality and prevent deterioration 
of stored foodstuffs in the PFDS 
Rationale 
Storage capacity for foodgrain is key both to accommodate the stocks needed to run the PFDS (see Aol 
4.1.2)and also the foodgrain that the Government decides to procure at the beginning of the procurement 
season. Thus, grain storage capacity can constitute a constraint to a well-functioning PFDS and can 
limit the scope of a procurement drive needed for price support if the stocks are already high. Recent 
years have seen limited increase in this capacity and as of 2018/19, the capacity stood at 2.0 million 
metric tons '*. DG Food currently owns seven silos and 3,081 flat conventional godowns of which 
some are unusable as they are up to 60 years old. Many traditional godowns lack moisture and 
temperature control facilities which can impact the quality and shelf life of the stocks and imposes a 
fast turnover. Foodgrain stored in inadequate warehouses pose potential food safety risks to the PFDS 
beneficiaries. Annual losses incurred by PFDS via leakages in grain stocks and deterioration in grain 
 
'*) Akhter, A. & M. Mehrab Bakhtiar. 2020. Boro rice procurement in Bangladesh: Implications for policy. Washington, DC: 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). 
'88 See Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), 2020. Op. cit. 
 
tt

quality are estimated to range between 17 and 20% of the value of stocks."*" Efforts are being made to 
expand this further: for example, the World Bank funded Modern Food Storage Facilities Project (2014- 
2023) plans to create another $35,500 metric tons of storage capacity with the constriction of eight 
modern steel silos and modernise management to reduce foodgrain losses by 50%. It also plans to 
upgrade existing ones. The MoFood aims to reach a storage capacity of 3.7 million metric tons by the 
end of the 8FYP in 2025. Once plans are made to incorporate non-grain foods to the PFDS (see Aol 
4.1.1), nutrient-sensitive storage adapted to these new commodities will also need to be made available. 
Action Agenda 
 1. Refurbish and construct new warehouses for foodgrain storage 
The 8FYP emphasizes the need to ensure quick responses and delivery to those vulnerable to hunger 
which entails improved storage capacity in specific areas of the country. The determination of the 
desirable stock size and therefore storage needed local will need to be based on such consideration. 
 
2. Develop technology-based modern storage facilities (in line with 8FYP) 
 
Given the scarcity of land in Bangladesh, the Government will focus on developing vertical storage to 
expand its capacity across the country. Attention will be given to intensive production zones and 
disaster-prone areas to boost response capacity. Modern technology will be usedto maintain quality: 
mechanized bagging systems, weighing and handling equipment and enhanced drying methods while 
maintaining moisture content and temperature to ensure the quality of stored foodgrain. 
 
3. Rollout and distribute stored foodgrain on a regular basis 
Stock rotation is paramount to prevent quality loss and deterioration of the foodgrain. For this, 
monitoring at local and national level is essential and will require upgrading of the systems in place. 
 
 4. Develop storage for new foods to be included in the PFDS 
Aol 4.1.1 proposes to include nutrient-dense foods to the PFDS for a more nutrition-sensitive system, 
In order to operationalize this, storage adapted to such food stuffs will need to be made ayailable. These 
will need to stave off attacks by pests and disease and prevent oils from going rancid through frequent 
stock rotation. This will require research and feasibility studies to be carried out to allow a nationwide 
rollout. 
Cross references 
«¢ NFNSP Aol 4.1.1; 4.1.2 
8FYP 2020-2025 
tr tegy 4.2.1 e ove disaste UPESE By | 
Strategy 4.2 has four Aols, covering actions before, during and after disasters, Aol 4.2.1 will support 
ex-ante measures to increase agricultural resilience to disasters. Aol 4.2.2 will ex-ante increase the 
resilience of poor families, especially farmers. Aol 4.2.3 will improve the operation of emergency 
shelters and services to protect life and well-being during disasters, especially of vulnerable groups. 
Aol 4.2.4 will strengthen FNS-related disaster responses, mitigation and rehabilitation during and after 
disasters. 
 
 
Kabir, R.L, Md. Yunus, T. Hossain & S. Rashi. 2019. Public food grain storage facilities in Bangladesh - An assessment of 
functionality, repair needs, and alternative usage. IFPRI Working Paper 002 
es 77 Il

Aol 4.2.1. Increase the resilience of agriculture systems through various mechanisms notably 
climate-smart technologies, adoption of stress-tolerant crop varieties and implementation of good 
agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries practices for the production of healthy foods 
Rationale 
Resilience and adaptation in agriculture are crucial for ensuring the continuity of food production after 
disasters. Bangladesh's disaster profile may be changing under climate change in terms of disaster 
types, frequency, intensity, locations and predictability. A range of practices and technologies exist that 
are useful against high-to-medium frequency disasters occurring with low or medium intensity, as are 
common in Bangladesh. Examples include flood- and salt-tolerant crops, alternate wetting and drying, 
cropping systems better adapted to drought or flood, urea deep placement, and floating agriculture. 
However, adoption has not reached the scale needed, even though there exist policies to enable scale- 
up, documentation of experiences, and economic benefits have been demonstrated at up to four times 
the costs.'"° In addition, new technology and practices require investments in related infrastructure. For 
example, water infrastructure reduces risks from storm surges, cyclones, floods and droughts, which 
can further accelerate adoption of new practices and technologies. This Aol is linked to strengthening 
of research and innovations under Aol 1.1.1, extension services under Aol 1.1.2 and water management 
under Aol 1.1.3. 
Action Agenda 
1. Shortlist technologies and practices for upscaling specifically for each "disaster hotspot" 
 
 
Many good technologies and practices are sitting on the "technology shelf' waiting to be scaled-up, and 
the Government will address this inertia by shortlisting technologies and practices for upscaling for 
each "disaster hotspot" identified in the BDP 2100, viz.: 1/ Coastal zone; 2/ Barind zone; 3/ Haor zone; 
4/ Chattogram Hill Tracts; 5/ River Systems.'"' Initially the Government will prioritise for scaling up a 
few technologies, varicties and practices most beneficial or scalable for cach hotspot. EAS will be 
delivered by Government agencies and also in partnership with NGOs and DPs. Gradually, more 
technologies, varieties, and practices will be prioritised for each hotspot. 
- Inthe coastal zone hotspot, the Government will emphasise salt- and stress- tolerant cultivars, 
and particularly varieties that tolerate combinations of submergence, waterlogging and salinity. 
The coastal zone has low productivity, especially in rabi crops, and has few high value crops. 
Extension services will further promote coastal aquaculture, such as through co-culture with 
crops and brackish-water fish. The guiding framework will be the 2012 Master Plan for 
Agricultural Development in the Southern Region of Bangladesh, and especially Chapter 6 and 
Chapter 7, which identify specific technologies, practices, actions and investment requirements. 
- The Barind hotspot ts prone to heat shocks, cold shocks, drought shocks and flood shocks. 
Problems include replenishment of wetlands, fish migration and spawning, groundwater 
depletion and excessive flushing of nutrients and pollutants. The emphasis here will be on 
sustainable water management, such as drip and sprinkler irrigation, alternate wetting and 
drying (AWD), reusing treated wastewater, wetland preservation - and ways of linking water 
pricing to usage, Lower water demanding varieties, especially winter pulses and oilseeds, and 
high temperature tolerant varicties of rice, wheat and maize, will be promoted. 
- The Aaor hotspot faces degradation of natural resources, flash floods and poor market linkage. 
The emphasis here will be technologies and practices to reduce loss of land, livestock and other 
assets due to flood and erosion. Particularly relevant is floating-agriculture for vegetable 
production. Cold tolerant and short duration rice varieties will be emphasised. The guiding 
framework will be the 2012 Master Plan for Development of Haor Region. 
- The Chattogram Hill Tracts faces soil erosion, siltation of waterbodies, low productivity, and 
limited diversification and agro-processing. Protected cultivation practices will be promoted 
 
' FAO. 2019. Disaster Risk Reduction st Farm Level, Rome, 
'! The BDP 2100 defined six disaster hotspots: 1/ Coastal zone (110 upazilas; 15% population); 2/ Barind zone (82 upazilas: 
15% population); 3/ /Taor zone (58 upazilas; 10% population); 4/ Chattogram Hill Tracts (25 upazilas; 1% population); 5/ 
River Systems (144 upazilas; 28% populstion) - and 6/ Urban zones (99 upazilas; 21% population), 
i?

that can be scaled-up for off-season cultivation of vegetables, spices and flowers. Technologies 
exist for expanded production and processing of cashew nut. Practices that increase the use of 
surface water will be promoted. 
 
 2. Adopt measures and infrastructure to enhance water management 
Many of the new seeds, breeds, technologies and innovations need linkage to water management as an 
enabler for upscaling and sa a particularly by small producers. Across the country rainwater 
romoted to relieve groundwater depletion. There is great ae to 
improve water harvesting atid retention ehroush the use of pools, dams, pits, retaining ridges, and 
increasing soil organic matter to heighten the water retention capacity of soils. Water use efficiency 
needs to be strengthened through sprinkler, drip and micro-irrigation. The Bangladesh Agricultural 
Development Corporation (BADC) and Barind Multipurpose Development Authority (BMDA) should 
better incentivize water saving irrigation devices (Aol 1.1.3), 
 
3. Strengthen extension and advisory services for technologies and practices prioritized for 
different disaster hotspots 
Strengthened EAS will target the prioritized technologies and practices in each "disaster hotspot". This 
links to especially Activity 1 in Aol 1.1.2, which will map EAS needs based on agro-ecological niches 
(an 8FYP objective), draw new knowledge from agricultural research, and incorporate it into updated 
training for EAS staff. 
Cross references 
e NENSP PoA Aol 1.1.1.; 1.1.2.5 1.1.3. 
BDP 2100 
SFYP 2020-2025 
Aol 4.2.2. Increase the disaster coping ability of poor farm families, support home-based farming 
especially through Amar Bari Amar Khamar (My Home My Farm), and protect poultry, livestock 
and other assets 
Rationale 
Investments to increase resilience, at household and community levels, help restart agricultural and 
other recovery after disasters. Whilst planning and resource allocation prioritised using poverty data 
remains important, a direct measure of vulnerability would be useful also. Homestead agriculture 
strengthens household resilience as it requires little land, women can contribute and it generates 
houschold cash, and can improve nutrition in the family. The Government's Amar Bari Amar Khamar 
project, started in 2009, operates in 64 districts, and aimed to and invest Taka 80102.7 million and cover 
6 million households by 2020. Protecting livestock and assets is important for enhancing the disaster- 
coping ability of families. Few emergency shelters in disaster prone areas accommodate livestock. In 
many places killa, a raised earthen platform for livestock, have been effective. These structures are not 
capital intensive, although there can be issues with land availability, proximity to human emergency 
shelters and lack of maintenance. Infrastructure for basic services also needs to be made more resilient 
to disasters. The market for agriculture or disaster insurance needs development, and requires better 
assessments of risks for actuarial development. In the 8F YP the Government will form a technical team 
to undertake rigorous risk accounting, and determine the baseline, benchmarks and targets, Some of 
the infrastructure construction and maintenance under this initiative can be done through seasonal 
public works (Aol 4.3.2), 
es |!

Action Agenda 
 
1. Develop a policy-relevant vulnerability index 
This action will develop a vulnerability index which will indicate the level of disaster risks across the 
country and this will be used to prioritise resources and monitor allocations. This index, for example, 
will augment data on poverty levels with data on past disasters, weather and climate change indicators 
- whilst remaining simple and transparent enough for it to be understood and to guide planning. A 
starting point, as mentioned in the 8FYP, will be the Delta Plan which shows that districts ranked as 
poorest are more exposed to natural disasters (risk category 1). Bangladesh has considerable data on 
past disasters, meteorology, environment and food security risks which could be used for this purpose. 
 
2. Promote homestead agriculture 
As part of broad-based support, the Government will promote homestead agriculture, especially through 
implementation of Amar Bari Amar Khamar. The quality and availability of gender-sensitive extension 
services will be enhanced to support homestead production (see Aol 1.1.2). 
 
3. Protect household assets during disasters 
Disasters destroy household assets which undermines the coping and recovery ability of families. The 
Government will invest in protecting livestock (with Ai/la for example), household agricultural assets 
and farm machinery, such as by building and maintaining adequate shelters (see Aol 4.2.3), Families 
will be supported with practical measures such as to cover pond embankments with nets to retain fish 
if ponds overflow in disasters. Household and community-based storage facilities, like silos, can be 
increased for storing food, seeds and other commodities. Besides the Government-run silos discussed 
in Strategy 4.1, the Government has distributed 70-litre waterproof food-grade plastic silos to half a 
million households in 19 disaster-prone districts to store seeds and foods during disasters, and this will 
be continued and expanded. 
 
 4, Invest in resilient infrastructure 
The resilience of basic services, especially water, sanitation and healthcare, are crucial for household 
recovery, Facilities, such as medical centres and schools, will be strengthened, such as through elevation 
measures. More resilient water supply and sanitation infrastructure will be built. 
 
5. Develop insurance schemes 
There is a need to facilitate the development of insurance schemes via public-private-NGO cooperation 
for losses due to disasters and climate change by supporting needs assessments and providing technical 
assistance. Bangladesh has been working in this area, and there is a need to expand and concretise the 
efforts. This would include the ADB-funded Pilot on Weather Index-Based Crop Insurance, Swiss- 
funded Bangladesh Microinsurance Market Development Project 2017-2021, and the World Bank- 
funded Bangladesh Insurance Sector Development Project 2017-2022. 
Cross references 
NFNSP PoA: Aol 1.1.2.; 4.2.3.; 4.3.2.; Strategy 4.1. 
e &FYP 2020-2025 
BDP 2100 
 
'? Directorate General of Food. 2019. 5,00,000 HH Silos Distributed as of November. Modem Food Storage Facilities 
Project. Ministry of Food, Government of Bangladesh

Aol 4.2,3. Ensure operation of emergency shelters with nutritious and safe food, safe drinking 
water, sanitation and healthcare for disaster-affected people, especially for women, elderly, 
disabled people and children 
Rationale 
In 2019, 4318 per 100,000 population were affected by disasters and 0.316 per 100,000 died from 
disasters (SDG 13.1.1). For this SDG, the target is to reduce the number of persons affected by disaster 
to 1,500 per 100,000 population by 2030. Bangladesh has increased the number of emergency shelters, 
by rehabilitating existing shelters and building new ones. Multipurpose shelters have been constructed 
that double-up as schools, which ensures that the buildings are maintained. Bangladesh still needs to 
invest in the capacity, quality, operation and maintenance of shelters. Many of Bangladesh's emergency 
shelters need improved basic services, especially power, water and sanitation, and the infrastructure for 
basic services in the community needs to be made more resilient. Attention also needs to be given to 
ensure that appropriate quantities of safe drinking water are supplied on a sustainable basis. Indeed, of 
the people who used newly constructed shelters during the 2019 Fani cyclone, only 35% reported 
adequate availability of water, and only 47% reported adequate availability of toilets,""* Coverage and 
outreach of emergency shelters need to be increased as well as facilities for basic needs during disasters, 
roads for quick access to shelters, and public awareness on the location of shelters. Women, elderly, 
disabled persons and children have special vulnerabilities during disasters, The National Women 
Development Policy 2011 calls for specific gendered design in disaster preparedness and responses and 
efforts must continue to this effect. 
Action agenda 
 
1. Invest in emergency shelters, disaster proofing infrastructure and early warning systems 
The Government will investment more in emergency shelters and disaster proofing infrastructure. A 
key approach will be multipurpose buildings, based on the experience of the Multipurpose Disaster 
Shelters Project which is constructing 552 new shelters and rehabilitating 450 existing shelters in nine 
coastal districts. Facilities in existing shelters will be upgraded, especially for water, sanitation and 
healthcare; space for childcare; facilities for pregnant women; separate women's toilets; physical 
accessibility for the elderly and people with disabilities; protection of personal security for women and 
girls; and safe storage. The action links to Aol 4.2.2 to enhance the coping ability of families and 
communities by making infrastructure for basic services more resilient to disasters. Resilient and 
upgraded schools, clinics and other public buildings will serve as shelters. 
 
2. Use PPPs to increase shelter capacity 
Public-private partnership will be used to rapidly increase capacity. The 2011 Cyclone Shelter 
Construction, Maintenance and Management Policy says commercial buildings can be used where 
public shelters are lacking. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the government and the 
owner can be drawn up by the Upazila Nirbahi Officer. This option will be pursued more thoroughly, 
and if necessary, training will be provided to UNOs. 
 
 
 3, Enhance capacities and participation in shelter operations 
This action will increase the training to GOs, NGO staff and volunteers on shelter operations. Also, the 
Guidelines for Disaster Shelter Management will be reviewed and strengthened. The participation of 
women and vulnerable groups will be promoted at all levels in decision-making. Needs of women, 
elderly, disabled persons and children will be better included in shelter design and operations. 
 
'3 DPDS, 2019, Mid-term evaluation report - Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Project. LGED 
es 3 I |

Cross references 
NFNSP Aol 4.2.2,; 4.2.4, 
Cyclone Shelter Construction, Maintenance and Management Policy 2011 
National Women Development Policy 2011 
Guidelines for Disaster Shelter Management 
Aol 4.2.4. Facilitate and coordinate disaster response, mitigation and rehabilitation through 
timety and strategic storage of public food stock, rapid distribution to disaster-affected people, 
and effective mobilizution through various modalities including public-private partnerships 
Rationale 
The effectiveness of emergency relief depends on pre-positioning food, logistics and the capacity for 
rapid and inctusive distibution. PFDS storage could be better Imked to data on disasters, such-es hazard 
maps, spatial information, and howschold-level data-A lot of food -and rice in particular - is held by 
the private sector, and so its post-disaster mobilisation matters, Humanitarian logistics ix "the process 
of planning, implementing end controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow and storage of goods and 
materials, as.well as related information, from the point of origin to the point of consumption to alleviste 
the quffering of vulnerable people." PPPs could draw on private sector logistics expertise and 
stimulate other innovations, such as using unmanned acrial vehicles (drones). Shock-responsive social 
protection can rapidly expand coversge, increase. benefits and add-extra types-of assistance ("cash 
plus"), Social registers, digital payments and financiv! inclusion help for shock-responsive cash 
transfers. The COVID-19 pandemic underlined the need for greater shock responsiveness in social 
protection. Anticipatory or forecast-based-social protection is delivered before disasters and better 
supports post-disaster recovery, because familics arc less harmed and productive assets can be 
protected"*= Disasters exacerbate nutritional nsks, through increased morbidity and disrupted 
healthcare; worsened diets, especially socess to fresh fruits, vegetables and/or animal source protein; 
inadequate water, hygiene and sanitation;-and reduced breastfeeding and care for infants heceuse 
mothers are stressed, malnourished and sick. Pregnant women, young children, the elderly and the sick 
are specially at risk. Technical capacities ure low, preparedness is often weak, and coordination 
mechanisms need sirengthening to sddress nutrition issues durmg emergencies, 
Action Agenda 
'1. Strengthen policies and procedures for disaster management 
The Government will strengthen its policies and procedures for disaster manegement, including the 
enaciment of a legal framework to implement the Standing Orders on Disasters (SFYP action). This 
will strengthen targeting mechanisms in public food distribution in tine with the NSSS, inciuding 
attention fo gender. Actions will be tiken to strengthen union and upazila disaster management 
committees to be more effective before, during and after disasters: The 2012 Disaster Management Act, 
the 2015 Nutional Disaster Munagoment Policy, the 2019 Standing Oniers on Disasters, and the 2016- 
2020 National Plan for Disaster Management provide the legal and policy framework, and set out the 
functions and duties of different actors, 
2. Enhance pre-positioning of public food stocks 
The Government will take actions to enhance the pre-positioning of public food stocks, so that it is in 
the right place at the night time, such as by improving the use of data, ICT and carly waming methods, 
 
 
 
 
 
'TM Loypaticn Cluster, 2006. Logistics Cluster Concept.and Guidelines, World Food Programme {lead agency). 
5 For oxaniple, on +July 2026, a "pré-petivarion (ar ccadiness?" response was triggered by a severe Dood forecast in Boguna, 
Gaibendha, Korigram, Jamalpur and Strajgunj, which led immediately to vulmntable families beng reyestered and Minds being 
pre-positioned, which wero released on 1) July, five days before the flood, 
is

and by increasing safe storage capacity, especially in remote areas and at the community level. The 
Central Aid Management System (CAMS) software developed for food aid under the Department of 
Disaster Management (DDM), will be used to help in doing this. 
3. Strengthen logistics in disasters i 
 
 
The Government will build on existing work to strengthen logistics in disasters. In 2019, Bangladesh 
started mapping national logistics capacities and stakeholders, and assessing logistics gaps in 
partnership with the Global Logistics Cluster of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee.'TM The purpose 
was to define a Logistic Preparedness Action Plan and to make operational a Preparedness and Response 
Platform that combines mapping, imagery, early warning, crowd-sourced information and logistics. 
This process will be developed and incorporated into the national disaster management system. 
 
4. Encourage private sector involvement | 
Private sector involvement will be encouraged. Three broad areas stand out, but other areas could be 
developed. First is partnerships and agreements to mobilise foodgrains held by the private sector in each 
locality, to help stabilise post-disaster food markets. A second area is PPPs to improve humanitarian 
logistics. A third area is on the application of new technologies, such as [CT and drones. 
 
5. Promote shock-responsive and anticipatory social protection | 
This action will promote the development of shock-responsive social protection and anticipatory social 
protection under the framework of the NSSS. It will build on Bangladesh's 2019 workshop on shock- 
responsive social protection''', and on Bangladesh's 2020 experience of delivering forecast-based 
social protection before a major flood, which delivered cash and non-cash support in advance. 
 
6. Enhance attention to nutrition in disaster preparedness and response 
This action will ensure more attention to nutrition in disaster preparedness and response. Nutrition 
Coordination Committces should be part of disaster preparedness and responses. Nutrition-specific 
measures should be better integrated into disaster-responses to support continued breastfeeding during 
disasters, the quality and availability of complementary foods especially for 6-23-month-olds, 
micronutrient supplementation where suitable, and timely identification and appropriate treatment of 
severe malnutrition. Prevalence of nutritional deficiencies in populations should be considered in 
disaster preparedness, especially for distribution plans for fortified mce and micronutrient enriched 
biscuits in the disaster-hit areas. During the COVID-19 pandemic, nutrient-dense foods, such as pulses, 
nuts, edible oil and dried-fish (in some cases) were included in food distribution, and this would need 
to be incorporated as a key feature of disaster response going forward. Gender considerations and 
women's roles in food preparation, childcare and family hygiene are other critical concerns. Broader 
nutrition-sensitive measures, such as for water, sanitation and healthcare need greater emphasis. Both 
human and monitoring capacitics need to be strengthened at all levels of the disaster planning and 
response frameworks. 
Cross references 
8FYP 2020-2025 
Disaster Management Act 2012 
National Disaster Management Policy 2015 
Standing Orders on Disasters 2019 
National Pian for Disaster Management 2016-2020 
 
'© TASC Logistics Cluster. 2019. Simulation-based Logistics Gap Analysis Workshop, IASC Logistics Cluster (2019) 
Quarterly Update July - September 2019 Bangladesh Preparedness 
\ GoB. 2019. Symposium on Adaptive Social Protection: Technical and Policy Considerations. MoMDR. 2-3 September 
2019, Dhaka 
es 3:3 ||

Strategy 4.3. Strengthen social protection for poor and vulnerable groups, including disabled and 
 
Strategy 4.3 is composed of four Aols to improve both the coverage and the composition of social 
protection to support access to food and nutrition "by all at all times". Aol 4.3.1 will strengthen FNS for 
all by strengthening social protection in disadvantaged areas and for disadvantaged people. Aol! 4.3.2 will 
strengthen FNS at all times by strengthening social protection during seasonal crises and food shortages. 
Aol 4.3.3 will improve nutrition by designing and implementing nutrition-sensitive social protection for 
nutritionally vulnerable people. Aol 4.3.4 will help integrate social protection with agricultural 
development, income generation, and micro-entrepreneurship to promote sustained FNS. 
Aol 4.3.1. Strengthen social protection in disadvantaged areas and for disadvantaged groups 
Rationale 
Gaps in social protection coverage exist in Bangladesh due to locational disadvantages (especially, 
chars, haors, hill tracts, remote areas and urban slums), and socioeconomic disadvantages (especially, 
female-headed households, children, elderly, disabled people, displaced people and minorities), BBS 
estimated that 28% of households received social protection in 2016/17, compared to 25% in 2010.'"* 
For example, the Old Age Allowance covers only a quarter of the eligible, and the Widow, Deserted 
and Destitute Women Allowance covers only a tenth of eligible women.' Progressively increasing 
coverage is necessary for the Government's goal to eradicate extreme poverty by 2031. There is also 
the need to progressively increase the size of benefits to adequately reflect needs. The National Social 
Security Strategy (NSSS) foresees in the longer-term the development of a National Social Insurance 
Scheme (NSIS). The COVID-19 pandemic underlined the urgency of strengthening urban social 
protection, especially those in informal sector work. According to the HIES 2016/17, just one-in-ten 
urban households received a social protection benefit. Targeting tools need to be improved by including 
FNS dimensions. The 8FYP proposes to develop multidimensional poverty measures for policy use. 
Electronic government-to-person (G2P) cash transfers can enhance inclusion of disadvantaged places 
(which are disaster-prone and less accessible) and inclusion of disadvantaged people (who can be less 
mobile and lack bank accounts). G2P would help the current problems of transfers arriving bunched 
together and requiring beneficiaries to travel to collect them.?" 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Expand and consolidate programmes in line with NSSS 
The Government will continue and expand existing social protection programmes for disadvantaged 
places (especially, chars, haors, hill tracts, remote areas and urban slums) and disadvantaged people 
(especially, female-headed households, children, elderly, disabled people, displaced people and 
minorities), and reform the programmes in line with the NSSS. This will include increasing the coverage 
of food and cash transfers for those unable to work. This complements Aol 4.3.4 for those able to work, 
which will strengthen links between social protection and productive activities. 
2. Report social protection coverage and budget data by vulnerable places and by vulnerable 
groups 
NSSS reforms aim to overhaul the entire social protection system, including consolidation of multiple 
programmes. The Government will ensure that access to food and nutrition is not compromised and 
 
 
8 These coverage figures do not consider whether households were poor, Targeting to the poor has shown little improvement 
between 2010 and 2016/17, and in both years the exclusion error was estimated as 67% (poor without social protection benefit) 
and the inclusion error was 20% (non-poor with social protection benefit). The estimates for 2010 are from Barkat A, et al, 
2013. Improving the Targeting Effectiveness of Social Safety Nets in Bangladesh. FPMU, and for 2016-17 from Islam Khan, 
T. 2020. Effictency of Delivering Social Protection Programmes in the North-West Region. Centre for Policy Dialogue, Dhaka, 
'9 Maxwell Stamp. 2017. A Diagnostic Study on Old Age Allowance and Husband Deserted Destitute Women and Widows 
Allowance, According to the Ministry of Finance, coverage in 2020/21 will be 49 lakh beneficiaries (with budget 2940 crore 
taka) and 20 lakh beneficiaries (with budget 1230 crore taka), respectively, 
2 For an example of the problems with the existing payment system, see World Bank. 2016. Allowances for the Financially 
Insolvent Disabled: Program Brief. Dhaka. 
ss

"lestTM in the various NSSS reform processes, by generating and reporting social protection coverage 
aad budget data in chary, haors, bill tracts, remote areas and urban slums, and for poor femaie-headed 
households, children, elderly, disabled people and displaced people, The data will be. assembled from 
the various MIS, und reported in policy-usefyl intervals, 
3. Include FNS indicators in NSSS management systems 
 
 
FNS data will be incorporated into social protection management systems, such as for beneficiary 
selection. This will be part of broader NSSS reforms to create a Single Registry-and a unified MIS. This 
action will focus on ensuring that when developing new management systems under NSSS reforms, 
FNS indicators such as the Integrated Food Security Phaso Classification (IPC) Chronic Food Insecurity 
Avalysis, are included, Related to this, Aol 4.2.2 will develop a Vulnerability Index to address disaster- 
risks, rather than poverty per so, and this indicator could be included too, 
|4. Initiate Child Benefits Scheme 
The Government is planning to launch a Child Benefit Scheme, and in 2018 established » Policy 
Guidance Unit under the Cabinet Division which will support its design and implementation, As an 
initia' stop, in the 8FYP the Government will start a cash transfer with 100% coverage for children 0 to 
5 years old in Rangpur and Mymensingh divisions 60% coverage in Rajshahi and Khulna divisions, and 
40% coverage in Dhaki, Chattogram, Sythet and Barishal divisions. Coverage will be expanded, if 
feasible. Similar steps will be taken towards universalisation of the NSSS"s other core lifecycle cash 
transfer programmes. 
5. Increase the use of G2P payments 
 
 
 
 
The Government will increase the use of electronic G2P paymonts to. beneficiaries. Pilots have been 
undertaken. Scale-up will be accelerated in the 8FYP. This action is connected to the 2020-24 National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy of Bangladesh, which aims to create a coordinated platform and leverage 
technology to include the excluded or vulnerable groups and sectors, 
16. Develop a more comprehensive approach to urban social protection | 
A more comprehensive approach to urban social protection will be developed. In the near term, this will 
focus on substantially increasing the inadequate coverage in urban areas through existing social 
protection programmes, and in the longer term it will develop greater opportunitics for contributory 
social security, which are necessary complements to the public-financed social protection programmes, 
 
 
Cross references 
NENSP PoA Aol 4.2.2,; 4.3.4. 
Action Plan for Implementation of NSSS of Bangladesh 2016-21 
2020-24 National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Bangladesh 
RF YP 2020-2025 
Aol 4.3.2, Ensure safety nets for the poorest and nutritionally vulnerable, expecially femule- 
headed households, during periods of seasonal crises and food shortages 
Rationale 
Seasonality in Bangladesh is linked to rice production, although less strongly than previously, There 
are two lean seasons, with employment shortages, income drops and food price rises. Tho oxact timings 
and durstions can vary year to year, and Bangladesh's northwest is widely recognised as afflicted, but 
seasonal stressea occur across the country in subsistence farming families. Fisherfolk need support in 
periods when fishing is banned. Urban seasonality was evidenced by the 2016-17 HIES that showed 
large dynamics through the year in urban poverty incidences ranging from 15.5% to 21.2%. Urban and 
rural sectors are linked by migration, remittances and other ways. Household nutrition can be seasons] 
due to seasonal access to water, sanitation, diversity of foods, and healthcare, Seasonal nutritionsl 
dynamics can differ in timing from the wider lean seasons. The 2014 (2015) State of Food Security and

Nutrition in Bangladesh found that food and nutrition insecurity peaked in January-April in the 
northwest, coastal! belt and northern chars, but not in the eastern hills, Aaor and Padma chars, where it 
peaked in September-December. Women and adolescent girls tended to be first to cut food consumption 
to cope with seasonal shortages. Complicating matters is that climate change might be altering 
Bangladesh's seasonal weather patterns: data from over 50 years suggest that Bangladesh's traditional 
six seasons might be merging into four seasons. Compared to natural disasters, seasonality is relatively 
slower to onset, protracted and recurrent, and hence more predictable. This means that rather than an ex- 
post shock-responsive social protection system, such as for disasters, the need is for an ex-ante adaptive 
system that can adjust to year-to-year needs. 
Action Agenda 
 1. Expand coverage of seasonal employment programmes in line with NSSS 
Seasonal employment programmes will be needed for the whole period of this PoA because the 
agricultural production cycle, particularly of rice, will continue to influence Bangladesh's economy. 
The Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP), Food for Work (FFW), Work for Money 
(WFM) and Test Relief (TR) will be continued. The four programmes will cover 74 lakh beneficiaries 
with a budget of 5723 crore taka in 2020/21, representing 6% of the social safety nets budget or 1% of 
government spending or 0.18% of GDP, and efforts will be made to increase coverage of the affected 
population in coming years*"' Greater management attention will be paid to ensure that programme 
implementation coincides fully with the timing of lean seasons, and that programmes adjust better to 
year-to-year variations in seasons. The four programmes are implemented by the Ministry of Disaster 
Management and Relief (MoDMR) and possibilities for consolidation will be explored under the NSSS 
to harmonise and strengthen targeting, administration, MIS and digital payments. MoDMR will explore 
how the public works activities in these programmes could be focused on reducing disasters risks and 
seasonality, because these will account for most of the remaining poverty in Bangladesh after economic 
growth lifts more and more people out of poverty in the next decade. Cash and food transfer 
programmes will be enhanced and expanded for fisherfolk especially during the banned period of 
fishing. 
2. Continue direct food transfers and subsidized foods to vulnerable groups 
 
 
Direct food transfers will be continued to vulnerable groups who cannot work during seasonal crises. 
The Government will continue the Food Friendly Programme (Khaddya Bandhob Karmosuchi), which 
provides subsidised rice to extreme poor families twice a year during the pre-harvest months of March, 
April, September, October and November. The Government's OMS in urban areas of subsidised 
foodgrains and other foods will be continued and expanded to meet the increased demand due to 
continued urbanisation and increased numbers of informal sector workers, Moreover, to be more 
responsive to seasonality and other temporal dynamics, OMS operations will better incorporate the 
Government's urban food price monitoring data. 
3. Invest in surveillance of seasonality in nutrition 
The Government will invest in surveillance and knowledge to better assess seasonality in nutrition, with 
the objective of developing practical measures and programmes. Big data might play some role (see 
Aol 5.3.2). Priority will be given to nutritional seasonality in the "first 1000 days" because for this age- 
group short seasonal stresses can be very impactful. Other prioritised vulnerable groups will be 
adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers. Rural and peri-urban homestead gardens, and 
urban rooftop gardens (Aol 1.2.3), will be promoted to support seasonal diversity of dicts. An expanded 
coverage in urban areas of complementary nutrition measures is needed. These interventions will be 
supported by stronger integration of nutrition objectives and activities into disaster response (Aol 4.2.4) 
and social protection programmes (Aol 4.3.3), 
 
of Finance. ; ety Net: - -21 Financial Year, Government o 71 Ministry of Fi 2020. Social Safety Net: 2019-20 & 2020-21 Fi ial Year, Go f Bangladesh 
iss

Cross references 
NFNSP PoA Aol 1.2.3.; 4.2.4,; 4.3.3,; 5.3.2. 
e Action Plan for Implementation of NSSS of Bangladesh 
Aol 4.3.3: Develop and implement nutrition-sensitive social protection programs, including food 
fortification, nutrition education, and behaviour change communication 
Rationale 
Social protection can positively impact nutrition by improving dietary quality, increasing income and 
improving access to health services. It can also influence practices related to care, sanitation and 
education. Also, the Vulnerable Group Development (VGD), Vulnerable Group Feeding (VGF) and the 
FFP offer opportunities to support nutrition by including fortified foods. In 2020, in the midst of the 
Covid-19 pandemic, the OMS programme included low-priced rice fortified with six micronutrients, 
namely Vitamin A, Vitamin B1, Vitamin B12, Folic Acid, Iron and Zinc. In this same period more 
diverse foods, rich in nutrients, were added to the food baskets distributed to the needy. Combining 
social protection transfers with nutrition education and NBCC substantially improves children's 
nutritional status.?"* MoWCA piloted the Investment Component for Vulnerable Group Development 
(ICVGD) program for destitute women, which adds a cash grant for investment, fortified rice 
distribution, and nutrition BCC to existing VGD activities and lessons need to be learnt from this 
experience. The actions proposed under this Aol seek to render existing social protection programmes 
more nutrition-sensitive and to reach the nutritionally vulnerable. 
Action Agenda 
 
1, Scale up the inclusion of fortified rice in the FFP and OMS, diversify the food distributed 
in social protection programmes, and monitor impacts on nutrition 
The FFP sells subsidized rice during March-April and September-November, including fortified rice 
since 2016, and this will be expanded. Inclusion of fortified rice in OMS was formalized by the MoFood 
in August 2020, and this will continue beyond the COVID-19 crisis. In addition, a wider range of 
nutritious foods will be introduced in the food basket distributed or sold at subsidized prices to 
vulnerable people, The impact on nutrition of fortified rice in FFP and OMS, and of diversifying foods 
in social protection transfer programmes, will be monitored. 
2.Enhance social protection programmes for nutritionally vulnerable women of 
reproductive age and children during the first 1000 days 
 
Focusing on women of reproductive age and children during the first 1000 days (from pregnancy to 
their second birthday) is the most efficient way to break the inter-generational cycle of malnutrition and 
poverty by ensuring the adequate growth and mental development of children. Led by the MoHFW and 
the Ministry of Women and Children's Affairs, services and interventions should be expanded with 
supplementary nutritional food according to the dietary guidelines of Bangladesh. In addition, maternity 
allowances to poor pregnant women will be expanded to support access to nutritious food, 
 
3, Enhance and integrate NBCC into social protection 
Based on the [CVGD and other experiences in Bangladesh and abroad, appropriate contextualized 
NBCC focusing on standardized and correct information on dietary knowledge, healthy cooking 
methods, nutrient dense-recipes, dietary diversity, appropriate Infant and Young Child Feeding (TYCF) 
practices, food handling, preservation, storage, food safety issues and WASH should be developed and 
disseminated (see Strategy 3.2). NBCC should focus on enhancing dietary and nutrition knowledge for 
all, regardless of economic and social status, age or gender. 
 
22 Akhter, A., JF. Hoddinott & S$. Roy, 2019. Food transfers, cash transfers, behavior change communication and child 
nutrition: Evidence from Bangladesh. IFPRI Discussion Paper 1868. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research 
Institute 
I

4. Expand the School Feeding Programmes in Poverty Prone Areas 
The School Feeding Programme (SFP) in Poverty Prone Areas which began in 2013 provides school 
children in selected areas biscuits fortified with vitamins and minerals (such as innovated by the 
National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase LI Project) and hot meals using locally sourced 
vegetables, lentils and micronutrient-fortified rice and oil. At present the SFP coverage reaches over 3 
million school children in 15,700 schools in 93 upazilas of 29 districts of Bangladesh. Students" 
attendance has grown in schools where cooked meals and biscuits are being served. The SFPs will be 
expanded and used as a medium to foster good food habits and healthy dietary practices among children. 
The National School Meal Policy 2019 has undertaken the universalization of the SFP through a phased 
approach by the fiscal year of 2023/24. 
Cross references 
e NFNSP AOI 4.2.1 and Strategy 3.2. 
Aol 4.3.4, Ensure proper coordination and co-operation to integrate social protection with 
agricultural development, income generation, and micro-entrepreneurship development 
Rationale 
Social protection integrated with agriculture, income generation, and micro-entreprencurship is often 
called "productive social protection", It helps strengthen the inclusion of the poor into GDP growth, 
which is crucial because the 8F YP estimates that even economic growth of 8 or 9% could be insufficient 
for the Government's target to eradicate extreme poverty by 2031. Moreover, the PP 2041 targets full 
employment by 2031, which will need the creation of two million jobs annually. Productive 
social protection promotes resilience to cope with risks and income volatility, and reduces reliance on 
low-productivity and insecure informal sector work. Productive social protection requires wide-ranging 
enablers. The Government's My Village, My Town Programme has great potential to help by extending 
to every village the facilities of modern towns, but coordination will be needed to ensure that productive 
social protection programmes best exploit the new opportunities. There is need to modernise and 
strengthen the training and skills formation component in most productive social protection 
programmes, because not only does the quality tend to be low, but also the training tends to be on a 
limited range of traditional activities and skills. Further efforts are needed to eliminate gender gaps. 
Around one-third of the population is aged 16-24 years. Productive social protection should be designed 
and implemented better to meet the needs and promote careers of young people. The school-to-work 
transitionis very difficult and causes many to become locked into low productivity, survival activities. 
Action Agenda 
1. Expand and consolidate productive social protection in line with the NSSS 
 
 
This action will support programmes that integrate social protection into productive activities. Existing 
programmes will be re/designed and modermised towards productive activities that stimulate 
agricultural diversification, agro-processing and structural transformation. Programmes will be scaled 
up to support the Government's inclusive growth strategy. Programmes will be reformed and 
consolidated in line with the NSSS, including to improve the selection of beneficiaries, management 
systems and the content of programmes, and this will be done through the coordination of the 
Livelihoods Cluster of the NSSS. Microfinance will need to play a role. 
 
 2. Ensure productive social protection are coordinated with My Village, My Town 
The Government has plans to stimulate rural transformation through investments under the My Village, 
My Town programme, involving 14 ministries and 20 agencies, which will extend modern civic 
amenities to every village. Since this is a multisectoral, multi-ministerial investment and development 
programme, coordination and cooperation from planning to implementation will be crucial to ensure 
that productive social protection programmes make the best of the new opportunities, and this action 
will ensure this. It is intended that by 2030 all upazilas will have a master plan. My Village, My Town

aims to create employment through agriculture-related and non-agricultural small-scale village 
manufacturing workshops and rural growth centres. 
 
3, Improve the quality of training, skills development and advice in productive social 
protection programmes 
This action will ensure the relevant parts of the 2011 National Skills Development Policy, such as 
certification, quality assurance and training of trainers, are identified and implemented to redesign and 
modemise the training and skills components of productive social protection programmes. The purpose 
will be to improve the quality of training, skill development and advice. Redesigned training will need 
to be relevant to the needs of women and young people. Different vocational training programmes will 
be consolidated, standardised and scaled up. This will need stronger coordination and cooperation 
between productive social protection programmes and various training centres, NGOs and TVET 
institutes (see Aol 2.4.1). Greater collaboration with private training services will be encouraged, and 
this can encourage greater links to private sector employers. 
 
 4. Scale-up productive social protection for women and other excluded groups 
The Government will scale-up productive social protection programmes that are designed to address 
gender barriers that hamper women's labour force participation, particularly in agriculture and related 
employment. The NSSS plans to consolidate the Vulnerable Group Development and the Widow, 
Deserted and Destitute Women Allowance into a Vulnerable Women's Benefit (VWB) that will be 
more tuned to income-generation - and when consolidating the programmes, attention will be paid to 
ensure that unconditional food and cash transfers will be maintained for vulnerable women who cannot 
work. Productive social protection programmes will be expanded to other excluded groups, such as 
those in remote areas, fisherfolk and minorities. 
 
5. Adapt social protection programmes to young people 
This action will design productive social protection programmes to better suit the needs and careers of 
young people. Apart from vocational training, poor and vulnerable youth need specially designed on- 
the-job experience and life-skills. Labour Force Surveys estimated youth not in education, employment 
or training (NEET) increased from 25% in 2013 to 30% in 2017. The National Youth Policy 2017 
should guide interventions, but is not strongly implemented in productive social protection programmes, 
Initially interventions will involve promoting agribusiness and agri-entrepreneurship, especially given 
the changing characteristics in the agriculture sector in the coming decade, such as greater 
mechanisation and less access to land (see Aol 2.4.1). The National Service Programme for young 
people with schooling, covering one lakh beneficiaries in 2020/21, will be improved, better linked to 
job-market opportunities, and scaled up. 
Cross references 
NFNSP PoA Aol 2.4.1. 
National Youth Policy 2017 
National Skills Development Policy 2011 
Action Pian for Implementation of NSSS of Bangladesh 
CS

6. Areas of intervention to achieve Objective 5 of the PoA 
Objective 5: To strengthen cross-sectoral food and nutrition security governance, coordination, 
capacity building and partnership for effective policy implementation 
 
 a "te wT ' - . a foofar . atit« wal o 7 ' D4 . ta ile | . ', shee I 7 r 7 
PEY D.1. EHIProve 1000 SHICLY, CUALLY CONITOL ANG HWHArCHeSS OF 1000 SHICTY RNG OYPICene | a P » st 
ve » eM 
erates 
Aol 5.1.1. Ensure conformity and compliance of food safety policies (laws, standards and 
regulations) 
Rationale 
The Constitution has enshrined the right to food as a fundamental principle of state policy in Article 15, 
and the food safety requirements must be ensured through enactment of appropriate laws. The Safe 
Food Act 2013 designates the BFSA with the responsibility, through coordination, for regulating and 
monitoring food manufacture, import, processing, storage, distribution, and marketing to assure the 
safety, wholesomeness and authenticity of foods. Amidst the complexity and wide range of acts, laws 
and regulations of various categories of food products that cut across the functions of various sectors, 
the Safe Food Act needs to be implemented. In 2020, the Bangladesh Agricultural Good Practices Policy 
was approved. Food safety standards and regulations cover not only food safety, but also issues such as 
plant and animal health, product quality, environmental protection, and social welfare. Food safety can 
be assured through an effective regulatory framework that prevents contamination during production, 
processing, preparation, and marketing in accordance with scientifically established food safety and 
quality standards. Despite multiple ministries and agencies having mandates on food safety matters, 
they do not have specific budgetary provisions earmarked for operationalisation of their food safety 
related activities. At the moment, there are central testing laboratories in the country but many lack 
updated facilities, have inadequate coordination and compliance of quality and technical standards set 
out by the BSTI. With regard to export, there is need to comply with options for benchmarking national 
GAP codes in Asian developing countries to internationally accepted standards, such as the Codex and 
EUREPGAP, and more generally respect international food safety and environmental requirements. 
The number of laboratories with proper international accreditation are few. In terms of trade, the current 
Import Policy Order needs to emphasize reform of the Inspection system to create a functional, 
competent inspection authority overseeing food safety for imported foods. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Harmonise laws, rules, regulations and standards, agree on a common strategy and define 
roles 
Harmonisation of the many laws, rules, regulations and standards across ministries will improve the 
food safety framework In the country. Indeed, overlapping of regulatory bodies and lack of coordination 
among ministries creates a haphazard and confusing situation, diminishing the goal of food safety'. 
Fifteen ministries are involved in food safety and quality control, while ten ministries are directly 
involved in food inspection and enforcement", The role of the BFSA which collaborates with 
government agencies such as the BSTI in the MolInd, MoF, Plant Quarantine Wing, DAE, MoA and 
Bangladesh Small and Cottage Industries Corporation (BSCIC) to harmonise food safety standards in 
compliance with WTO requirements must also be better defined. Harmonising standards will improve 
 
*@ LUISDA. 2019. Bangladesh Food and Agricultural Import Regulations and Standards Report FAIRS Annual Country Report, 
GAIN Report Number: BG 1812 
24 Thi. 
io

the government's role in food safety oversight, The BFSA Technical Committee will need to determine 
the food safety and nutrition standards and eluborate steps in improving coordination between ministries 
to implement a food safety strategy with clearly defined rotes and responsibilities of different 
agencicsministrics. The food safety strategy developed by BFSA is expected to serve the purpose. 
Further, an assessment of resources and needs, aheed of the development of action plans will be 
conducted. Guidelines for the implemetitation of quarantine and import policy orders to ensure the 
satety of imported foods are also required. Legal provision of up to life-term imprisonment against the 
offense of adulterating food and medicinal products will be introduced, 
 
 2, Develop guidelines for food safety inspections 
BFSA needs to develop strict guidelines for food safety inspections and ensure strict compliance of the 
food inspection yuidelines and manuals, Port teams should be trained to sample and then send the 
samples for testing in acoredited laboratories which should ideally be located at the ports. The guidelines: 
should include all the clements* of inspection and cettification systems for the food production, 
processing, preparation, marketing and imported foods. Legislation should clearly establish the 
authorities required to implement control over non-compliant food (both local and imported). These 
include the power fo suspend or revoke authorizations, to setze and detain non-compliant products, to 
destroy non-compliant food, to levy administrative fines. or penaltics, to prosecute and seck court- 
imposed penalties. Existing initiatives -such us the Global Food Safety Initiative (GFSD)-approved third 
party assurance program introduced by USDA which is an overarching body that provides globally 
recognised product certification for food safety, which is required by some companies for their 
suppliers, will be built upon to facilitate trade and export. 
 
3. Strengthen existing capacities and build new ones 
Comprehensive analyst training programmes are required along with the introduction of standardized 
methods of analysis and the application of standardized laboratory quality assurance program, With the 
increased demand of safe food, Bangledesh Agricultural University (BAU) has launched a diploma course in 
Food Safety, The concerned authority needs to utilise the undergraduates as future food analysts and 
inspectors. The current tnanpower should be provided with a refresher training and efforts should be 
made to recruit more skilled manpower. An expanded network of duly accredited |aboratories for food 
sofety will be developed and services expanded. BSTT's capacities 'also need to be enhanced. 
 
4. Strengthen the capacity of the Bangladesh Accreditation Board 
The capacity of BAB to accredit inspection and certification bodies based on international standards 
(ISO 17020 and ISG: 1702) must bo strengthened, including by 'supporting its application for 
membership to the International. Accreditation Forum. Its ability to accredit independent, third party 
inspection and certification systems will be promoted to help expand the certification and inspection 
ecosystem in Bangladesh beyond government owned institutions. 
Aol 5.1.2. Develop, improve, and establish traceability mechanisms and enferce regulatory 
frameworks to control food hazards within the food supply chain 
Rationale 
Food can be contsminsted at any point of the food supply chain, from production to consumption 
therefore food safety is critical in both domestic and intemational trade. With the rise in consumer's 
expectations of'safe and healthy food, all the participants in the food supply chain need to ensure that 
effective practices.are in place to ensure food safety, Traceability or product tracing is defined by the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission as "the ability to follow the movement of a food through specified 
stage(s) of production, processing and distribution". Trac¢ability within food control systems is applied 
es 9: 8!

as a tool to control food hazards, provide reliable product information, and guarantee product 
authenticity. To this end, traceability processes and regulatory frameworks are vitally important for 
food safety as well as operational efficiency of the food supply chain. In Bangladesh, there is almost no 
food traceability*", and food safety risks are high given the inefficiencies in food transportation, 
handling, and storage. However, with increased engagement of private sector partnerships, 
multinational food companies are applying tracking processes as part of product development. With the 
advancement of digital tools and systems for tracking progress of policy issues in Bangladesh, 
establishing e-traceability systems for food safety would also be a way forward. Initiatives started in 
2009-10 for the shrimp sector on electronic traceability should be built upon. As part of the food safety 
control system, it is also important to engage in public dialogue for effective and efficient control based 
on scientific evidence and good governance principles. BFSA needs to integrate robust traceability 
studies as part of its regulatory mechanisms to inform the system and put in place measures to improve 
the FVC. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Develop and strengthen the national food safety control system (in line with NPAN2 Key 
Strategy 6.2.5. and 6.5.8) 
The National Food Safety Management Advisory Council will support BFSA to develop/strengthen the 
national food safety control system. In applying traceability across all or specified stages of the food 
chain, the code of best practices should be implemented across all movement points from production to 
distribution. A coding system of farms is needed, and the farms should be brought under a national 
registration system, The National Food Recall System will empower the authority to enforce and 
oversee the provisions associated with food recall and traceability. Zoning of shrimp farms, registration 
of horticulture zones, livestock identification and registration system as notable examples will be 
undertaken by the responsible sectors. It will also exercise legal action against producers, packers, 
traders, manufacturers, processors, retail stores and food service operators, who are in violation of these 
provisions, and help increase accountability among. the food business operators. Blockchain will be 
explored as a means to ensuring traceability: blockchain is a decentralised, distributed and public digital 
ledger that is used to record transactions and does not allow any alterations without the agreement and 
active involvement of everyone in the network. Transactions can be viewed simultaneously and in real- 
time, with both greater security and transparency. Barricrs and challenges across the system will need 
to be addressed, with regard to the availability of high-speed internet services across the value chain, 
capacity to use the technology and adherence to policies and regulatory frameworks. 
 
2. Prepare strategy, guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures (in line with NPAN2 Key 
Strategy 6.5.8) 
A National Food Safety Strategy on food safety will need to be claborated and implemented and a 
National Plan of Action on food safety developed. BFSA will need to prepare manuals, guidelines, and 
SOPs in consultation with different sectors that can be utilised by the grower, manufacturer, retailer, 
exporters and other involved stakeholders. To build a robust food safety system, the authorities need to 
assess the hazards and suggest preventative actions, To develop a manual for GAP, GMP, GAqgP and 
GHP, the authority needs to conduct a systematic review (hazard analysis) of the production 
environment and all inputs for the purpose of identifying any hazard that may present a potential risk 
for contamination of the food. Once the programmes such as GAP, GMP and GHP work effectively 
within a food operation, the HACCP can be applied. Legal frameworks should be sufficiently precise 
 
705 In 2009 for example, a paper-based traceability system was developed with about 200,000 gher farmers in Bagerhat district 
registered by DoF with the support of UNIDO. Frequent gher ownership changes rendered traceability extremely challenging 
and called for a digital system. (Islam, M-R.. M.M. Rahman & M.M. Haque. 2017. Strength and weakness of oxisting 
traceability system of seafood production in Bangladesh, Progressive Agriculture 28(2) 
lo?

to clanfy roles and responsibilities, and, at the same time, sufficiently flexible to enable adaptation to 
scientific development or new findings, or changing programme requirements (sée Aol 5.1.1.), 
 
 3. Build an ecosystem of accredited independent certification and inspection agencies 
An ecosystem of accredited independent certification and inspection agencies is recognized as an 
important element in food control and will need to be built. Having GAP certification facilities in 
Bangladesh is a prerequisite for the food safety system. BFSA could also coordinate with the private 
enterprises that are setting up GAP certification services, which will need to be accredited by BAB or 
other international accreditation bodies. Accredited third party management system certification bodies 
are also relied on to conduct food safety audits and issue certificate of food facilities. However, there is 
an urgent need for BAB to provide guidelines and procedures on conformity assessment activities, such 
as testing, inspection and certification that can operate to international standards. The network of mobile 
courts should be scaled up across the country to continue identifying food safety violations as well as 
indiscriminate or illegal use of pesticides and antibiotics. 
4. Strengthen linkages with INFOSAN 
 
 
In order to bolster the country's capacity to manage food safety emergencies, BFSA should also 
strengthen its linkages with International Food Safety Authority Network (INFOSAN), Linkages must 
also be developed between Codex and INFOSAN focal points at national and global level (see NPAN2 
Strategy 6.5.8). INFOSAN is an important platform for exchange of information in case of food safety 
crisis and for food sharing data on emerging or routine food safety issues. Through INFOSAN, WHO, 
in collaboration with FAO promotes cross sectoral collaborations and information sharing during food 
safety emergencies, as in the COVID-19 situation where a focus on new technologies and 
communications, and on handwashing and hygienic practices would be the key for the future of food 
safety. The emergency focal point for INFOSAN serves as a critical link in sharing information with 
the INFOSAN Secretariat and other members on food safety issues that may be relevant at the 
international level, promoting partnership, collaborations and dissemination of relevant information and 
guidance within the national agencies and the country, 
5. Strengthen product certification to ensure quality and safety 
Although export-oriented large-scale food processing industries have quality and safety certification 
(GMP, GHP, HACCP, ISO 22000:2005, ete.), certified farms for primary producers (c.g.»GAP and the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Good Aquaculture Practices (ASEAN GAgqP) are almost absent 
in Bangladesh. Steps will be taken to bring primary producers and MSMEs under various 
certification schemes to assure product quality and safety for the domestic and export markets. The 
Bangladesh Agricultural Certification Body established to provide Bangladesh GAP Certificate will 
need to be made functional. 
 
6. Provide training and enable implementation of food safety practices (in line with NPAN2 
Key Strategy 6.2.5. and 6.5.8) 
Training on GAP, GAgP, GHP and GMP will be provided to concerned actors along the value chain. 
HACCP and personnel hygiene practices must also be effectively implemented at all levels of food 
production and in all processing units. Nationwide training and capacity building in food safety and 
hygienic food handling should be undertaken for street food vendors and urban food producers drawing 
upon successful lessons from within Bangladesh, adapting from updated guidelines from South East 
Asian countries*" and also including COVID-19 considerations". This should be in compliance with 
the Codex General Principles of Food Hygiene and GMP to allow the producer to operate within 
 
 
206 For example FAQ's "Improving Food Safety in Bangladesh" programme, in parinership with the Khulna City Corporation, 

"7 WHO/ FAO/ Mahidol University.2012. Regional Consultation on Safe Street Foods 
28 Zhang, J, (2020) Asia's Street Food Scene Is Changing Amid Pandemic: Eater. 23 December 
es 93 ||

environmental conditions favourable to the production of safe food. Primary producers and MSMEs 
require not only technical support to adopt these improved practices throughout the supply chain to 
assure product quality and safety for domestic and export purposes, but also for financial and livelihood 
gains. Nationwide training should be undertaken for street food vendors. 
Cross references 
e NPAN Key Action Areas 6.2.5.: Promoting/Enforcing measures to ensure regulations of 
production/ processing/marketing/ preservation of food items Increasing knowledge and 
improving practices to ensure food safety along the value chain; 6.5.8, Key Action Areas: 
Strengthening the enforcement of Food Safety Act 2013 
Aol 5.1.3 Develop and promote education and consumer awareness on food safety 
Rationale 
Every year, one in ten people in the world fall ill and 420,000 die after eating food contaminated by 
bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances, Food contamination and food adulteration are 
significant problems in Bangladesh. They occur due to the absence of a satisfactory food regulatory and 
control system and the lack of education and awareness among food producers, food handlers and 
consumers. Heayy metals and trace elements accumulate in bio systems through irrigation water and 
soils contaminated by industrial discharge, fertiliser use, sewage and waste, eventually entering the food 
chain. Chemical contamination also occurs due to the deliberate mixing of adulterants to food. Bacterial 
contamination is common during storage, transportation and processing. Those handling food are often 
unaware of the existence of food-bome disease and of how cross-contamination can occur. In addition 
to jeopardising the safety of food, inadequate practices can also weaken its nutritional yalue. The issue 
of food safety needs particular attention with respect tothe FNS of more vulnerable people. Indeed, where 
food safety hazards are detected, in the absence of adequate food standards and enforcement, suppliers 
may divert contaminated food to unaware, poorer buyers*"'. These issues have now been mainstreamed 
in policy, notably in the Bangladesh Food Safety Act which now needs to be implemented with planning, including 
budgetary allocations. The Health Population and Nutrition Sector Development Plan identifies food 
safety as one of 20 components in its operational plan for NNS, and outlines actions for strengthening 
laboratories, surveillance and enhancing public awareness. In 2018, a telephone helpline (333) was 
opened by the GoB which amongst other things, allows consumers to report food adulteration. 
Awareness raising on the importance of food safety must continue, tailoring the messages to groups as 
different as houschold cooks, children, men who often take care of the food shopping and women, given 
their multiple roles in the household-preparing the food, distributing it, feeding children, storing it, etc. 
Action Agenda 
1. Develop an extensive field campaign (in line with NPAN2 Key Strategy 6.2.5. and 6.5.8) 
 
 
BFSA needs to develop an extensive field campaign focusing on safer food, clean food preparation, 
handwashing and basics of food safety (in line with Aol 3.2.2), Comprehensive packages of food safety 
awareness materials already exist (prepared by FAO and WHO for example) and may be readily used. 
Food safety will be included as a part of regular school curriculum. One of the most effective ways to 
enhance consumer awareness is through building BCC campaigns delivered through platforms such as 
mass media, print media, radio and other public forums, The campaign should include safe animal 
source foods handling and preparation, safe storage, contamination, adulteration and cleanliness. The 
private sector can be a key partner in delivering effective messaging on safe food through the advertising 
 
2° FAO. 2019. The State of Food and Agriculture 2019, Moving forward on food loss and waste reduction. Rome 
os

it uses in its.sales strategy. Civil society organisations (CSOs) such as the BSAFE Foundation whose 
mission isto "Educate people to develop a safe food culture across the value chain 'from Farm to Plato" 
should also be closely involved, Pood safety activitics being promoted through national events such as 
the National Nutntion Week, the Nutrition Olympiad, World Food Day, the World Breastfeeding Week, 
the National Food Safety Day, World Food Satety Day, the National Vegetable Fair, the National 
Fruit Fair, World Milk Day and World Egg Day must be strengthened, and also implemented at sub 
national levels using digital platforms. Campaigns such as Food Safety Week will be utilised to enhance 
consumer awareness and the public's interest in issues of food safety emphasising key proventative 
measures. BFSA's-restaurants' pradation according to an international system to indicate their quality 
based on hygiene and food safety regulation will be expanded end promoted so that consumers are able 
to make informed choices. This should also work ss an incentive for restaurants to comply with BFSA 
standards, 
 
 2. Support and strengthen consumer forums 
Forums like CAB and BFSN which can serve as a platform to raise swareness and Involye the general 
public towards food safety initintives will be promoted and strengthened. Such forums can help 
establish # food safety culture and strengthen food safety advocacy among the community. BFSN needs 
fo be rejuvenated as an advocacy group for food satcty, At the subnational levels, "healthy market 
place" and "healthy street food vending" initiatives were supported through various food safety projects, 
Khulna and Barishal districts had emerged as "safe food upazilas". Such food safety initiatives as well 
as safe food clusters at the subnational levels will be reactivated in collaboration with BFSA und BFSN, 
 
 
3. Carry out risk assessment and risk communication 
The BFSA should form a Risk Assessment Unit that can carry out the function of risk assessment and 
risk communication. The committee can provide s fremework which will collect, process and analyse 
food safety risks for products, processes and activities. The quality and safety of food depends on 
responsible action by all involved at all stages in the food chain, including consumers, Consumers 
require access to adequate information about potential hazards end appropriate precautions to be taken 
in the final preparation and serving of food. In addition, consumers need to be aware of and 
understand food safety contro) measures implemented by their government in the interest of consumers' 
health. Capacity strengthening experts at national and subnational levels in the detection and 
assessment of food adulteration, contamination and dietary risk surveillance also requires: urgent 
attention. 
 
Cress references 
* NFNSP PoA Aols.3.2.2. 
« NPAN Key Action Area 6.2.5: Mainstreaming food safety, water, sanitation & hygiene 
practices in sectoral SBCC; 6.5.8, Key Action Areas: Enhancing public awareness on food 
safety. 
 
The 2030 Sustuinable Development Agends emphasises the importance and critical role of sustainable 
production and consumption systems that contribute to food security and sustainability of natural 
resources, SDG 12 aims to ensure "sustainable consumption and production patterns", and one of its 
targets (SDG 12.3) calls for halving rates of FLW. This in turn would contnbute to meetmg a number 
of other SDGs, such ws those on hunger (SDG2), poverty (SDG1), and health (SDG3). The Government has 
set several targets to meet the SDG12 commitments defined and priontised in national medium- and 
long-term development strategies and vision. This Strategy is set to contribute to the goal of NFNSP 
and to the achievernent of FNS-relevant SDG targets, including target 12.3 that aims to "halve the per 
es * I)

capita global food waste at the retail and consumer level, and reduce food losses along production and 
supply chains including post-harvest losses by 2030". 
Aol 5.2.1 Minimise on-farm food losses 
Rationale 
Food loss is the decrease in the quantity or quality of food resulting from decisions and actions by food 
suppliers in the chain, excluding retail, food service providers and consumers*'', On-farm food losses 
can occur before, during or after harvesting, In some instances, crops are left unharvested for lack of 
manpower or lack in financial incentive to do so or due to inadequate technologies and farm facilities. 
Farm level food losses occur primarily during the harvesting period. Climatic conditions and events 
such as flood, heavy rains and drought can cause significant crop losses. For example, high water stress 
during the flowering and maturing stages can lead to rice yield losses as high as 70%*"'. Losses can be 
reduced through improved technologies and changes in farming practices as proposed under this Aol. 
While there is no definite estimate of food losses for Bangladesh, FAO?" recorded all FLW?" estimates 
for Bangladesh from grey literature to national and sectoral reports between 2000 and 2017 and found 
an average rate of 7.4% with a wide variation from a minimum of 0.5% to 35%, These high levels of 
losses negatively impact nutrition and safety of foods, notably fresh produce, which arises as a result of 
chemical and microbiological risks in horticultural chains and mechanisms for mitigating these risks*"*. 
Food losses at farm level clearly represent significant volumes and a serious problem that affects 
sustainable food and agriculture development and raises FNS issues for national agriculture systems. 
Reducing food losses is paramount to achieve FNS and it is also needed for environmental sustainability: 
up to 10% of global GHG emissions originated in FLW over 2010-2016", 
Action Agenda 
1. Formulate a National Strategy on Food Loss and Waste (as per 8F YP) 
 
 
As per the recommendations of the 8FYP, a National Strategy on Food Loss and Waste will be 
formulated based on detailed study of food loss and waste in both crop and non-crop sectors. 
 2. Provide training and tools to improve timing of harvest 
The availability of tools (e.g., moisture meters, smart meters for maturity measurement) to ensure that 
harvest takes place at an optimum time will be expanded. Better access to market information, climate 
services and improved farmers' skills and knowledge and the establishment of local information 
networks will also allow farmers to better schedule harvesting (see Aol 1.1.1), Ensuring that 
commodities are harvested at the right maturity stage will reduce losses and ensure quality, 
 
 3. Promote mechanisation and affordable loss-reducing technologies (as per Aol! 1.1.1) 
Expanded usage of combine harvesters and other agricultural harvesting and cultivation equipment will 
support food loss reduction, mitigate nutrient losses, increase efficiency, save time and reduce 
harvesting and cultivation costs, fostering better retums and livelihoods for farmers. On-site farm 
waste processing technologies will be developed to convert it into animal feed, for bioenergy purposes 
or soil improvement. In particular, using the recyclable waste from the fishers, quality feed may be 
produced; alternatively these feeds could provide rich content of protein and nutrient value to the yields 
(see Aol 1.1.6). Moreover, intelligent decision-making tools, sensor technologies, and new processing 
 
210 Jhid. 
"11 Word Bank. 2019. Climate Smart Agriculture Investment Plan 
412 FAO, 2019. Op. cit. 
2 This figure includes waste. 
214 FAO. 2021, Reduction of post-harvest losses in horticultural chains in SAARC Countries, Regional Technical Cooperation 
Programme (TCP) Project - TCP\RAS\3502 
215 IPCC. 2019, Special Report on Climate Change and Land 
iss

technologies should be used to recover and make use of edible portions of food and retain the nutrients 
within that would be otherwise lost. GAP and GAgP will be strengthened. In Bangladesh, GAP has 
been developed, and BARC ts the Scheme Owner, DAE the certification body and BAB the 
accreditation body, although they are yet to issue certificates. Post-harvest treatments will also be 
encouraged at farm level: indeed, crops that need to be stored, are highly perishable or need to be 
transported over long distances can benefit from special treatments to slow deterioration and minimize 
losses*'*, These may actions such as hot water treatment for disinfection, techniques to inhibit 
sprouting of items such as potatoes or onions, fungicide application. These methods need to be promoted 
and new ones that are adapted to different types of farmers developed through R&D (see Aol 1.2.2), in 
collaboration with the private sector. In fishery supply chain, a solid basement and/or control zones 
development near catching points can significantly decrease losses and spoilage of fish products. The 
adoption of these loss-reducing technologies assumes that certain prerequisites are in place. For example, 
access to finance to be able to invest in these technologies (see Aol 1.1.4) and stable provision of 
electricity and water. 
 
 4. Improve and develop on-farm storage (see Aol 2.1.1) 
Existing storage conditions must be improved and modern food storage facilities expanded to meet the 
demand for storage space and conditions, especially for perishable produce. The NAP PoA 2020 (Key 
Area of Intervention 2.1.1 and 2.1.2) proposes to construct community storage of grains in each Union. 
Low cost zero energy cool chambers that can store vegetables and fruits up to one week as well as 
irradiation facilities to reduce the cost of storage of vegetables like potato and onion at 12-15°C for 
longer periods will be developed. This will also enable the safety and nutritional quality of the 
vegetables such as preventing the undesirable sprouting of potatoes and onions and conserving vitamin 
losses, A lack of storage facilities leads to sudden spikes of regional supplies and decreases prices to 
levels that are unprofitable for producers, It also limits the amounts of vegetables and non-rice 
commodities that can reach areas further from the market hubs, such as the North of the country. Making 
storage and cold storage widely available and promoting its use can also encourage farmers to diversify 
their production (see Aol 1.1.1 and 1.2.1) by making alternative crops more attractive, Cold storage 
units are beyond the investment scale of most individual farmers and finance must be provided to 
smallholders to help them access refrigerated units. The capacity of licensed warehousing will also be 
increased to help farmers store their produce safely and economically, and help the country manage its 
food security in times of disruption such as, natural disasters or foreign trade failures. The development 
of specific types of storage for certain commodities should be promoted. For example, fresh fish storage 
in improved fish containers such as styrofoam boxes is estimated to enable reduction in quality loss. 
 
5. Encourage the development and adoption of climate smart technologies and practices 
 
Investments in research of resilient crop and horticulture varieties that can resist acute climate events, 
resist pest and diseases and better withstand harvest will be promoted and disseminated (as per Aol. 
L.1.1. and 1.1.2) using traditional plant protection and breeding techniques but also innovative plant 
breeding techniques such as genome editing. For example, improved seed varietals with short-lived and 
flood-tolerant features will allow Aaor farmers harvest before a flash flood (as suggested by the World 
Bank's CSAIP for Bangladesh). 
6. Shorten value chains (as advocated in Aol 2.2.1) 
 
 
Any measure that will help shorten the value chain -especially for perishable foods- will contribute to 
reducing food losses. To this effect, minimising the number of intermediaries between the time food is 
produce to the moment it sold to the consumer should be sought. For example, by strengthening the role 
of POs and cooperatives (see Aol 1.1.9) and promoting inclusive cooperative/group-based processing 
and marketing (see Aol 2.2.4), some intermediaries can be eliminated. Encouraging consumption of 
 
246 FAO. 1989. Prevention of post-harvest food losses fruits, vegetables and root crops a training manual 
rs °" Il

locally produced food is another solution with the promotion of urban-based food production including 
at the household level (Aol 1.2.3.), 
 
7. Involve and sensitise all value chain stakeholders to develop solutions, including women 
(see Aol 5.4.2) 
Sustainable solutions to reducing farm level food losses will be developed through the creation of multi- 
stakeholder networks that will engage scientific organizations, the private sector, farmers' associations, 
and civil society. Importantly, effective network and linkages among growers, processors and other VC 
actors should be part of these actions. This may include, inter alia, expansion of joint projects and 
training activities with universities and research institutes. Such networks will not be limited to looking 
at farm level value chains but will look at issues relating to transport, processing and safe storage (see 
Aol 5,2.2.). International connections will also be made to learn from other countries' experience, 
Training and field demonstration programmes will help sensitise producers to the issue of losses. 
Studies will help national and subnational level agriculturists, post-harvest processors (see Aol 5.2.2.) 
and farmers in planning their activities across the supply chain structure. It will also enable them to 
identify the critical loss points, their causes and the likely solutions to address the causes. 
 
 
 8. Improve data available on on-farm food losses 
FLW data collection and production, as well as international guidance on conceptual approaches and 
methodologies adopted are fast evolving. For example, the methodology on SDG 12.3.1 has recently 
been approved and endorsed. Adoption, piloting, and effective application of this methodology requires 
capacity development that need to be incorporated in national strategic priorities and actions, 
Achieving SDG 12.3.1 requires an improved and harmonised data eco-system enabling production and 
computation of relevant indicators along with proper monitoring and reporting mechanisms in place. 
The main strategic goals defined in the Bangladesh Strategic Plan of Agricultural Statistics (2016-2030) 
will ensure that agriculture and rural statistics -including information on food losses- are coherent, 
reliable, and internationally comparable. This will require strengthening statistical capacity to produce food 
loss and waste related data (see Strategy 5.3). The private sector will also need to be involved in 
monitoring their food losses and waste. Both quantitative (or physical) FLW and qualitative (nutritional 
and well as economic) FLW will need to be researched for adequate interventions to be devised on 
different commodity value chains, including livestock, poultry and fish. 
Cross references 
e NFPSP PoA 1.1.1.5 1.1.2.5 1.1.4.5 1.1.6.5 1.1.9.5 1.2.1; 1.2.3.5 1.2.4.5 2.1.1.5 2.1.2.5 2.2.4.; 5.2.2.; 
5.4.2.; Strategy 5.3. 
e NAP PoA 2020: Key area of intervention 2.1.1. Storage structures for foodgrains and 2.1.2. 
Pack house-based value chain for vegetable & fruits with sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures 
for loss reduction 
e BBS Bangladesh Strategic Plan of Agricultural Statistics (2016-2030) 
e SDG 12.3 
° §8FYP 
Aol 5.2.2. Reduce off-farm losses 
Rationale 
In South Asia, food losses are mostly prevalent at production, handling and storage levels, and less at the 
consumption level*''. Losses during processing tend to be very high in developing regions because of 
 
17 Champions 12.3. 2017. SDG Target 12.3 on food loss and waste: 2017 Progress Report. An annual update on behalf of 
Champions }2.3. 
bos

inadequate local technologies for perishable products such as fruits und vegetables*!*. The agro-food 
processing industry reportedly contributes about 8% to manufacturing output and 1.7% of GDP*"*. The 
engsgement of the private sector is thus paramount if this issuc is to be tacklod successfully and for this, 
the right incentives need to be in place, Transportation from the farm introduces a time gap between 
various stages of the food supply chain, from production to consumptionTM" where food and nutrient 
losses can occur, This may be duc to damage of the produce because of inadequate tomperature, 
mishandling, or even contamination. In Bangladesh, perishable foods are at high nsk given the 
environmental variability, climate and limited availability of cold chains. Inadequate processing 
facilities also-trans!ate in clevated losses for produce such as milk. While Bangladesh needs to focus on 
achievernent of SDG 12.3 which seeks to halve global food waste at retail und consumer levels-as well 
as to reduce food loss during production and supply, care must be taken to work on this tanget in 
'conjunction with the objective of keeping food safe (sce Strategy 5,1,): lack of compliance with and 
inadequate enforcement of laws, niles and regulations on food safety and hygiene will result in food 
being discarded and therefore in higher losses, Many of the initiatives seeking to reduce on-farm losses 
(Aol 5.2.1) also apply to off-farm losses; both Aols should therefore be considered in conjunction, 
Action Agenda 
1. Develop, invest and apply appropriate technologies (in line with the BDP 2100) 
 
 
Public warehouses will bo modemised and the expansion of private storage and cold storage in 
particular encouraged, Simple mnoyations such as replacing sacks by plastic crates which can reduce 
damage and losses itt tomatoes and perishable vegetables during transport will be disseminated for 
uptake, Alternative packaging techniques such as vacuum packing, and nitrogen flushing will also be 
encouraged to preserve the freshness and nutritional quality of food for longer periods. Some 
innovations have already taken place along the agri-food value chain in Bangladesh with for example 
the rapid uptake of plastic crates im place of woven baskets and jute sacks to handle high-value, 
nutritious products such as mango", Domestic abattoirs, live bird and fish murkets will need to be 
modernised with periodic surveillance conducted. For perishable horticultural commodities, controlled 
atmosphere storage, modified atmosphere storage, heat treatments (hot water, hot air, irradiation), use 
of ethylene scrubbers and ethylene inhibiting compounds, postharvest fungicides, sanitizers such as 
eloctrolyzed oxidizing water, biotechnological tools will be expanded in order to prolong storage life 
and reduce losses. Other countries' expericnees will be drawn upon, 
2. Enhance food processing capacity 
 
 
Food processing involves the transformation of products originating from egriculiure, forestry and 
fisheries and this plays an important role in tackimg FLW by ellowing foods to be preserved, conserving. 
micronutrients and enhancing shelf life of the products, For example, crops, grains, fish, horticulture 
and dairy can be preserved by drying, mechanical dehydration, pasteurization, ultra-beat treatment and 
freezing, as notable methods. This includes minimal processing as well as secondary (the conversion of 
ingredients into edible products} and tertiary processing (the production of prepared convenience 
foods), In Bangladesh, women have an important role in food processing and need to be trained to use 
appropriate and novel techniques (sce Aol 5.4.2) . 
 
 3. Lmprove transport Infrastructure (in line with Aol 2.1.1,) 
Transportation infrastructure from the production aite further down the supply chain requires 
improvement with for example, the development of transport with refrigerated, cooling and ventilation 
systems (and more generally integrated cold chains). In Bangladesh, agricultural freight is handled 
mostly by road transport and intermodal connections and efficient networks need to be developed. Other 
 
2) Regal, VL; Lia, 8.2017. Food toss and waste in tbe food sepply chain. Intermetional Not and Deled Frait Council 
=° Hiussain, TMB. & E. Papudopoulou. 2010, Competitive capacity und expart potential of agro-processing industries under 
the trade lmberulization regime of Bangladesh: Asian Journal of Food and Agro Indastry 
2° FAO. 2019. Op. cit, 
*! World Rank. 2020, Promoting Agn-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh 
a

means of transport, notably inland water transport must be developed, The number of fish landing 
centres will be enhanced in coastal areas which should help reduce loss and improve the quality of fish 
products and seafood. 
 
4. Create an enabling environment for FLW reduction with focus on the private sector 
For on-farm food loss reduction (see Aol 5.2.1), some basic conditions and incentives are needed to 
attract stakeholder' attention to act on food reduction, Access to finance (Aol 2.2.2) and the creation of 
an enabling environment that will allow MSMEs to invest in efficient technologies that will minimise 
losses are needed (Aol 2.2.3), For example, a continuous supply of water needs to be 
guaranteed if cold chains are to be put in place, Transport infrastructure is also a necessary condition as 
goods need to be moved promptly along the supply chain, especially for perishables. Technology 
transfers and knowledge on food losses from the public sector and between private agents needs to be 
facilitated (Aol 5.5.3). The private sector is more likely to act on food loss reduction if they are 
responding to a demand. For this, an effort to sensitise actors along the value the chain to the relevance 
of this problem is required (as advocated for in Aols 5.2.1 and 5.2.3 for waste). Rules, regulations and 
standards and their enforcement is also a prerequisite (Aol. 5.1.1). 
 
5. Involve all value chain stakeholders to develop solutions and sensitise them to the issue 
of food losses 
As suggested in Aol 5.2.1 for farm level losses, efforts will be made to create multi-stakeholder 
involvement in order to devise solutions and draw from existing experiences both national and from abroad. 
Communities should document their best practices and be engaged in planning and implementation 
through a participatory and consultative process. Initiatives will be taken to sensitise all actors of the 
value chain to the problem of food losses and training imparted on how they can contribute to minimise 
it. Such measures will target for example ,farmers/truck drivers and workers involved in loading, 
delivery and logistics operations as well as women given then important role in post-harvest activities. 
 
6. Improve data available on non-farm food losses 
See action 7 in Aol 5.2.1. 
Cross references 
e NFPSP PoA 2.1.1. 2.2.2.; 2.2.3.; 5.1.1.5 5.2.1.5 5.2.3.; $.4.2.; §.5.3.; Strategy 5.1.; Strategy 5.3. 
e BDP 2100 
e $DG123 
Aol 5.2.3 Tackle food waste 
Rationale 
Food waste refers to the decrease in the quantity or quality of food resulting from decisions and actions 
by retailers, food services and consumers. Food waste is different from food loss due to distinct 
drivers that generate it, thus requiring different solutions. Food that is still fit for human consumption 
may be removed from the supply chain either by choice or because it is spoiled or expired. In 
Bangladesh, food waste contributes 68% to the aggregated municipal solid waste which amounts to 
19,362 tons/day'. Not only does the disposal food waste constitute a sizeable logistical problem, 
especially in the context of a fast-growing population, it also raises ethical issues in a country where 
many still suffer from food insecurity and malnutrition. A survey found weddings to be the main 
 
222 FAO. 2019. Op. cit, 
24 Alam, O. and He, P. and Fan, L., Food Waste in Bangladesh - Quantification, Impacts and Management: A Review .2015. 
IWWG-ARB 2015 2nd Symposium of Asian Regional Branch of International Waste Working Group, 2015 
"4A 2019 survey undertaken by Action Aid Bangladesh (AAB) and Macomm.

culprits in food waste followed by restaurants and homes?' Food waste is also linked to retailers' and 
consumers' behaviour with an oversupply of food due to consumers' shopping and cating habits*TM. 
Currently, much of the urban food waste is mixed with other household waste thus impeding its 
recycling. It ends up in dumping sites without any segregation or pre-treatment leading to leachate and 
GHGsTM*, Open burning is also frequent both in rural and urban areas adding to the environmental 
pollution. The reduction of food waste will not only impact food and nutrition availability but also 
contribute in decreasing the substantial levels of environmental pollution that currently exist. 
Action Agenda 
 1. Raise awareness on food waste issues and implement prevention and mitigation measures 
While campaigns already exist to educate the population on the importance of safe and nutritious food, 
emphasis will be placed on the problem of food waste and on the measures that individuals, households, 
schools and communities can take to tackle the problem. Awareness will be raised on portion or serving 
sizes and standardized food preparation quantities both in homes and in institutional food service, 
Women will be targeted for their key role in ensuring FNS within the household (see Aol 5.4.2). "Plate" 
waste in hospitals, canteens, school cafeterias, restaurants and hotels also require attention. Restaurants 
and events' organisers will also need to be targeted by awareness campaigns with clear guidance on the 
actions they may take to reduce waste. Training and outreach programmes on how to appropriately 
conserve and preserve food will be conducted using different platforms such as television cookery 
programmes, virtual learning modules and community-based activities, Public campaigns and advocacy 
such as the UN's International Awareness Day on FLW or FAOQ's and Messe Diisseldorf's Save Food 
Global Initiative will be promoted. Innovative initiatives around the globe will be examined and their 
relevance to Bangladesh gauged for possible adoption. Among them: the Love Food, Hate Waste 
campaign, which has resulted in significant changes in reducing household waste by bringing together 
government agencies, community organisations, chefs, businesses, trade bodies and local authorities 
and individuals can be suitably adapted. 
 2, Labelling (sce Aol 2.3.1 and 3.2.1) 
Bangladesh recently promulgated the BFSA Packaged Food Labelling Regulations 2017"" further 
measures will be taken to ensure that nutrient labelling and product information is available on food 
products in order to guide the consumers to select foods wisely, know the nutrient contribution of the 
product and consume them within the best date. Bangladesh will need to participate and contribute to 
the current debates regarding food labels which have gained increased focus globally in recent years, 
Food labels need to strike a balance between ensuring food safety, nutrition returns and minimising 
food waste. Laws and regulations will be adapted to this effect and incentives and training given 
especially to MSMEs involved in the value chain. 
 
3. Support technological innovations to ensure re-use and repurposing of waste 
 
Support will be provided for technological innovations to ensure re-use and repurposing of waste, 
including i) establishment of on-site food waste processing technologies that can be incorporated into 
residential and commercial sites, ii) installation and op eration of waste management systems 
iii) biotechnology solutions to convert food waste into animal feed, energy or fertiliser, iv) nutrient 
extraction from food waste, y) intelligent decision-making tools, sensor technologies, and new 
 
29 FAO. 2018. Food loss and waste and the right to adequate food: Making the connection, Right to Food Discussion Paper 
= Alum, O, and He, P, and Fan, L. 2015. Food Waste in Bangladesh - Quantification, Impacts and Management: A Review. 
IWWG-ARB 2015 2nd Symposium of Asian Regional Branch of International Waste Working Group 
2) BFSA, 2017, BFSA Labelling Regulations of Packaged Food 2017. 
es 1018)

processing technologies, to recover and make use of edible portions of food that would be otherwise 
wasted. 
 
4. Introduce innoyative/modern solutions for waste reduction through mobile applications 
and networking 
Learning from other country experiences, mobile applications to maximise the sale or donation of food 
will be developed for Bangladesh, in collaboration with the private sector. Feeding India' for example, 
collects excess food from restaurants and caterers and delivers it to undernourished people through 
a network of volunteers."Too Good To Go' is an application currently present in 12 European 
countries that enables food outlets to sell the food that will otherwise go waste, at reduced prices, 
 
5. Improve data available on waste 
 
As the interest in FLW grows especially in light of the aim to achieve SDG 12.3.1., a number of studies 
on food waste have been carried out but they tend to focus on particular aspects (restaurants in Dhaka, 
food waste management, etc.), There is a clear need to monitor the food waste situation in different 
settings of the country to be able to implement policy actions in the nght direction (see Strategy 5.3). 
As for food losses (5.2.1 and 5.2.2), attention will be given to physical, nutritional, and economic losses. 
Cross references 
e NFPSP PoA 2.3.1.; 3.2.1.; 5.2.1.; 5,2.2.; 5.4.2.; Strategy 5.3. 
e $DG123 
 
 
Aol 5.3.1. Produce/generate, disseminate and ensure access to reliable and timely FNS data and 
information by setting up an inter-agency FNS data sharing mechanism 
Rationale 
FNS data production, generation and dissemination plays a pivotal role in evidence-based decision and 
policy making by helping to gauge economic development, poverty and nutrition progress. A distinct 
feature of the planning process in Bangladesh - led by IMED, is the emphasis on results-based 
management tools implying regular monitoring and evaluation of targets, achievements and financing, 
Accordingly, the CIP2 (2016-2020) provided an analytical framework to assess the results achieved in 
poverty and nutrition as well as the investments made towards achieving these results. Data are also 
needed for decision-making by actors along the FVC and can improve the functioning of value chains 
and marketing systems (see Strategy 2.2). Certain information for example, can help direct and 
drive private investments . Not having the information can drive up transaction costs and create entry 
barriers in agro-food processing, marketing and distribution (Aol 2.1.4). While BBS is the centralized 
official bureau for collecting and disseminating data on a host of FNS relevant subjects, many other 
organisations also have a role in data generation. For instance, BNNC has developed a web portal for 
divisional and district level nutrition profiling and a data warehouse was also developed for NPAN2 
nutrition related indicators monitoring. The wide range of data required by all stakeholders calls for an 
FNS data strategy to develop a comprehensive network of FNS information system, in line with "Digital 
Bangladesh". A prerequisite for such system is the harmonisation of FNS information systems across 
sectors which consider UN fundamental principles, and quality standards and good practices such as 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and Special Data 
Dissemination Standards (SDDS), Data provided by the government functions are not always made

available in a timely fashion or remain unavailable in some key areas (for instance, upazila level price 
data) and there is scope for improvement in terms of how they are publicised (e.g., websites not updated or 
not user-friendly ). New types of data (e.g., Big data, block chain data - see Aol 5.3.2), 
interconnections between databases to enable data exchange and accessibility, and property rights on data 
are also issues that need consideration. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Set up a FNS data strategy for a comprehensive network of FNS information systems 
FNS data encompasses a continuum between agricultural production, market access and food utilization 
data which implies that data collection processes and their related institutional frameworks need to be 
organized in a comprehensive way. The Bangladesh Strategic Plan for Agriculture and Rural Statistics 
(SPARS, 2016-2030), for instance, aims to strengthen and develop well-coordinated and 
integrated agriculture and rural statistical system. With the goal of strengthening the capacity to monitor 
progress towards reducing undernutrition and to direct funding to more cost-effective and evidence- 
based programmes, the NIPN, recognises as main challenge, data generation methods, data 
frequency and yalidation processes. Improved coordination between the agriculture-specific, nutrition 
and FNS data collection and institutional frameworks (Aol 5.3.4) will require a FNS data strategy under 
the leadership of BBS. To this end, enhancing the role of BBS as a central repository and data provision 
and validation unit will be essential. To ensure no overlap, reliable and timely data and filling of data 
gaps, a comprehensive FNS data assessment will need to be performed with an emphasis on 
disaggregated and location specific data, Based on that, agreements and protocols for data exchange 
among the various institutions will be established. 
 
2. Strengthen capacity and budget allocation of all FNS data collecting agencies through an 
RBM approach 
All public data collecting agencies, including BBS, need to be strengthened through technical capacity 
development and training to address the vital concern of providing timely and more accurate FNS 
related data and information. An RBM approach will be systematically applied to assess institutional 
needs and gauge activity planning of different agencies involved. Data and information collection 
especially at subnational level, dissemination and online access will be given priority to improve 
transparency. To this end, the M&E function within data collecting agencies, including BBS, will be 
also strengthened including at local level, emphasising data quality, timeliness and access. In line with 
the 8F YP, independent evaluations and assessments will be implemented to ensure that expected goals 
are met. 
 
3. Leverage the FAO Hand-in-hand initiative by building on the existing FNS institutional 
framework for data management 
The FAO Hand-in-hand initiative' and other relevant initiatives will be leveraged. Aimed at 
country ownership, the FAO Hand-in-hand (Hi) initiative in Bangladesh will build on the success of 
existing FNS national data management systems - primarily that of BBS, the MoFood, the MoA, the 
MoEFCC - and on well-established FNS institutional frameworks - the Food Planning and Monitoring 
Committee (FPMC) and the Food Policy Working Group (FP WG) and TTs- for data management to 
facilitate evidence-based policy decisions and uptake (Aol 5.5.1). The main FNS institutional actors 
 
8 Using the most sophisticated tools available, including advanced geo-spatial modeling and analytics, Hand~in- 
Hand identifies the biggest opportunities to raise the incomes and reduce the inequities and vulnerabilities of the rural 
poor, who constitute the vast majority of the world's poor. It uses these tools to understand e comprehensive view of full 
economic opportunities and to improve targeting and tailoring of policy interventions, innovation, finance and investment, and 
institutional reform accordingly. 
es 1030

will therefore support to HiHTM' will generate a Geographic Information System geospatial platform 
with location specific data (up to district and upazila level) as an output. Synergies with relevant partners 
and strategies both at national (e.g., SPARS, the Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing 
Organization (SPARRSO) and NIPN) and international level (e.g., development partners), will be 
explored, 
 
4. Integrate the Aid Information Management System (AIMS) with the Hil and investment 
planning 
Established in 2010 and based on the Paris Principles of aid effectiveness, the Joint Cooperation 
Strategy (JCS) primarily aims to translate the international commitments on aid effectiveness at the 
country level. Anchored in the JCS, Local Consultative Group (LCG) represents the main coordination 
platform between the government and DPs is Bangladesh. The 8F YP defines the AIMS as the platform 
through which all aid data is shared by DPs and made public in Bangladesh. AIMS will have to be 
improved and integrated with the HiH initiative,the NIPN, and with the new upcoming CIP, 
Cross references 
NFPSP PoA Aol 2.1.4; 5.3.2; 5.3.4; 5.5.1 
SF YP 2020-2025 
Bangladesh Strategic Plan on Agricultural and Rural Statistics (2016-2030) 
NIPN (2018-2023) 
PP 2041 
Aol 5.3.2, Develop and implement a big data analytics ecosystem for the food system 
Rationale 
Data hold a key role in tackling some of the challenges faced by food systems to ensure FNS for all. 
The amount of data collected in the context of food systems is substantial and the SDGs, especially 
SDGs 2, 3 and 17, encourage sharing of information on agriculture and nutrition." Big data are high- 
volume, high-velocity and high-variety information assets that require new forms of processing and 
governance to enable enhanced policy decision making. With big data, data sources are unstructured or 
semi-structured, ranging from unstructured texts, spatial data such as audio and image files produced 
by tracking smart devices, to inventory control systems or point of sale data. Big data analytics is the 
process of examining big data to uncover information such as hidden patterns, correlations or market 
trends that can help with decision making. In order to be able to translate digital opportunities into agro- 
food value addition, a data infrastructure is required to complement FNS structured government 
database systems (Aol 5.3.1). To harness the potential of big data in agro-food sustainable development, 
the realization of Digital Bangladesh and the achievement of full power generation capacity in rural areas 
is required (see Aol 2.2.3), An effective big data analytics ecosystem for the food system can help devise 
adequate responses to climate change variability, environmental impacts of food production (footprint), 
food safety, and can help analyse and forecast overall FNS situation, including with regard to food 
markets in terms of production, supply, demand,and prices. When integrated with spatial data (e.g., 
SPARRSO, HiH), it can help improve the targeting effectiveness of social protection and rural 
development programmes' beneficiaries; it can also reduce information asymmetries along the FVC, 
 
#24 Such us the Food insecurity and experience scale (FIES) and the Indicator for Food Price Anomalies (IFPA) and other data 
related to agro-ecology, water, land, soils, GHG. 
*° Musker, R. 2019. Big data in agriculture and nutrition. In Agriculture for improved nutrition: Seizing the momentum. 
Chapter 14. Fan, 8. Yosef & R. Pandya-Lorch (Eds.). Wallingford, UK: Intemational Food Policy Rescarch Institute (IFPRI) 
and CABI 
110s

thereby facilitating investments decisions (see Aol 2.1.4) by, for example, providing real time data to 
farmers (see Aol 2.2.5) and other FVC agents. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Develop human resources to harness the opportunities offered by big data analytics 
 
In order to fully harness the opportunity offered by Big data analytics, human resources will continue 
to be developed, leveraging on the national education system and ICT curriculum, and the large pool of 
online workers®'. This will include a training need assessment of FNS related institutions and the 
delivery of ICT training of public workers in key FNS institutions. 
 
2. Develop a big data governance framework 
This action is closely aligned with Strategy 5.5 aimed at strengthening FNS governance, policy 
coherence, capacity strengthening and leadership across stakeholders. BBS, MoF, MoC, Molnd, 
MoEFC, and all other government institutions collecting and/or storing agricultural and FNS-related 
data will have to work with data providers and data users to establish clear frameworks governing data 
access and use in line with the e-Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh (2019) and the 
PP2041. The regulatory and governance framework will have to be adjusted (see Aol! 2.1.4) and private 
data protection ensured, in particular with reference to the provision of private sector data for public use 
and agro-food related research (including food safety). 
 
3. Combine big data with spatial data 
The HiH initiative and SPARRSO activities (see Aol 5.3.1) will be leveraged to integrate big data with 
spatial data. This integration offers the opportunity for more effective spatial targeting and tailoring 
GoB, DPs and private investment programmes. A system of incentives for the provision of farmer level 
data will be considered and will be piloted in order to obtain data in synergy with rural digitalization 
and financial inclusion. To this end, farmers and agro-food processing and marketing groups and 
cooperatives may be leveraged too (Aol 1.1.9 and Aol 2.2.4). 
 
4. Facilitate the connection between the ICT functions and Nutrition Sensitive Value Chains 
 
In line with the e-Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh (2019) and the PP2041, the key FNS 
actors will have ICT units able to effectively follow up and translate Digital Bangladesh into reality in 
the FNS-related government offices. PPPs will be promoted to ensure investment potential in the sector 
is fully exploited at rural level. For instance, the positive experience of the Union Digital Centres 
established by Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRD&C ) 
with a2i programme at Union Parishad level to provide ICT support to rural people may be emulated. 
Cross references 
e NFPSP PoA Aol 1.1.9; 2.1.4; 2.2.3; 2.2.4; 2.2.5; 5.3.1; Strategy 5.5. 
e E-Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh (2019) 
e PP2041 
Aol 5.3.3 Operationalise implementation of the NFNSP 2020, its Plan ef Action and Country 
Investment Plan through an effective M&E system 
Rationale 
Evidence-based support to policy makers is needed more than ever to address the multi-layered and 
fast-evolving challenges faced by Bangladesh in its endeavour to achieve FNS for all and in particular 
 
GLICT Division. 2019. E-Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh (2019). Government of Bangladesh 
es 1051 |

for the poorest and most vulnerable communities, especially women and children, the elderly and the 
disabled living in poor, disconnected and fragile areas. Adequate information and analyses must be 
provided to decision-makers so that they can effectively prioritise interventions. In line with the CIP2 
(2016-20,) the NFNSP adopts a food systems approach in order to address the complexities of the food 
system. This PoA aims at operationalizing the NFNSP by translating the targeted initiatives into 
concrete areas of interventions within food systems in connection with other reference strategic and 
programmatic documents. In order to effectively prioritize interventions and necessary investments, a 
new CIP needs to be designed. The CIP2, as of June 2019, was worth 19.2 billion USD ,the equivalent of 
more than 6% of GDP and involved 19 government ministries, agencies and departments. With new 
challenges emerging, the breadth and size of a new CIP is likely to be even greater with important 
implications for its implementation and ever more reliance on disaggregated and location-specific 
data collection (Aol 5.3.1),to adequately target beneficiaries as prioritized by the 8F YP and monitor 
progress. 
Action Agenda 
1. Design a new CIP for local and sustainable food systems 
 
 
The CIP2 ends with the latest monitoring reporting cycle planned to take place over 2021. It sets forth 
priority nutrition-sensitive investment programmes for each interrelated component of the food systems 
- growing, harvesting, packing, processing, transforming, marketing, consuming and disposing of food 
-and related financing. While the heterogeneity of data and data sources required to monitor the CIP2 
demonstrate the need of a FNS comprehensive data strategy (Aol 5.3.1), the need to make this effort 
location-specific, sustainable and will drive the design of a new CIP. The setup of the new CIP will 
require extensive consultations among the stakeholders (especially at local level), including the GoB 
and FNS partner institutions, private actors and DPs. New FNS partners and stakeholders will be 
included in the consultations as FNS-relevant domains expand through emerging crosscutting themes 
such as the Blue Economy (Aol 1.1.7) or the need to consider regulation and competition functions into 
agro-processing (Aol 2.1.4). The methodological approach will also need to account for the 
heterogeneity of data used, coming from both structured (Aol 5.3.1) and unstructured/semi-structured 
(Aol 5.3.2) sources. 
2. Set up a unified institutional framework for NFNSP PoA, SDGs and the new CIP 
 
 
Accordingly, building on the current setup, the FNS institutional framework will be revised to account 
for a more local, inclusive and private sector oriented nature. Specifically, the composition of FPMC, 
the National Committee, the FPWG and TTs will be revised by including stakeholders including new 
institutions (e.g., from the Blue Economy Cell! or the Bangladesh Competition Commission) and 
ensuring local stakeholder representativity. The continued involvement of the private sector and DPs 
will be ensured with an increased involvement of the relevant LCG. In addition, a more institutionalised 
involvement of the DPs at operational level by sharing projects' information and data will be discussed. 
 
3. Strengthen the monitoring framework leveraging on existing initiatives and synergizing with 
the private sector 
The monitoring framework will require an in-depth review to make it more relevant for the various 
stakeholders. Engaging them in the process will ensure that the outputs produced meet expectations, To 
this end, a survey of the various stakeholders (including the private actors) will be carried out to 
understand the usefulness of the monitoring products. This will, in turn, increase the commitment and 
active participation by the various actors to the process thereby also contributing to a strengthened 
policy uptake (Aol 5.5.1). The monitoring framework will be adjusted based on the required monitoring. 
These adjustments will be leveraged based on available human and financial resources. The monitoring 
products may be used by MoF to account for FNS investment volumes, to align DPs' technical and 
financial support to country investment's needs and gaps, to feed into the United Nations Sustainable 
ios

Development Cooperation Framework Programme for Bangladesh as well as the SDG progress report, 
They may also find a role for the private sector and investors within the framework of the Federation 
of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI). In addition, synergies with AIMS, HiH 
and the SUN networks at various levels will be exploited. An early engagement of all stakeholders is 
required to tailor the monitoring process and outcomes to their needs. 
Cross references 
NFPSP PoA Aol 1.1.7; 2.1.4; 5.3.1; 3.3.2. ; 5.5.1 
8FYP 2020-2025 
CIP2 2016-2020 
CIP2 MR20 
Roadmap to the CIP2 MR20 
Aol 5.3.4, Ensure the cross-sectoral integration of the NFNSP, PoA and its investment plan with 
other FNS-related initiatives and its coherence with national socio-economic development efforts 
Rationale 
The PP2041 is a unified plan of cross-sectoral multidimensional policies which outlines the vision on 
how to reach the goal of Bangladesh becoming a developed nation by 2041. In this context, a necessary 
condition to effectively operationalize the NFNSP PoA and its investment plan (Aol 5.3.3) and to ensure 
its policy uptake (Aol 5.5.1) is its coherence with the PP2041 strategy formulated in the five-year plans, 
and the cross-sectoral integration with other FNS-related initiatives. This is ensured, firstly, through 
adequate stakeholders' participation in FNS governance (including the private sector's), which requires 
effective representation in the unified institutional framework for NFNSP PoA, its investment plan and 
the relevant SDGs monitoring (Action 2 of Aol 5.3.3); and secondly, by leveraging on existing 
initiatives and synergizing with the private sector (Action 3 of Aol 5.3.3), From a practical point of 
view, this is done through the inclusion and active participation of all potential FNS stakeholders - 
including the General Economic Division (GED) in the Planning Commission providing support to 
sustainable and inclusive planning project in monitoring the SDGs - from design to implementation of 
both the NFNSP PoA and its investment plan. Also, adequate cross-fertilisation of the monitoring 
efforts and its related products (e.g., thematic policy briefs) will ensure that the outputs of the PoA and 
its associated investment plan are effectively utilized. This can be facilitated by enabling positive 
collaborations among the government, the private sector and DPs through continuous institutional 
capacity strengthening of relevant FNS agencies (Aol 5.5.1), To ensure this, high level political 
commitment and leadership to prioritise FNS of the most vulnerable and poorest, in the most remote 
and fragile areas of the country must continue. 
Action Agenda 
1. Set up a unified institutional framework for NFNSP PoA, SDGs and the new CIP (See Action 
2 of Aol 5.3.3.) 
 
2. Strengthen the cross-sectoral integration of NFNSP PoA and its investment plan by 
leveraging on existing initiatives and synergizing with the private sector (See Action 3 of 
Aol 5.3.3.) 
 
3. Strengthen capacities of the BFSA, BNNC, and FPMU (Sce Actions 1, 2 and 3 of Aol 5.5.) 
 
es 107 f!

Cross references 
NFPSP PoA Aol 5.3.3; 5.5.1 
CIP2 2016-2020 
CIP2 MR20 
Roadmap to the CIP2 MR20 
PP2041 
 
 
 
Aol 5.4.1. Develop and implement effective regulatory instruments and guidelines for priority 
issues 
Rationale 
Existing regulations will be effectively implemented, and new guidelines/regulations introduced as 
required, to ensure sustainable management of natural resources, safe diets, and inclusive markets. Food 
safety, market-place management (including online and retail markets), food price stabilization, NCDs 
control, environment conservation and biosafety, anti-trust and anti-monopoly, breast milk substitution, 
complementary food, and the right to adequate food are among the priority issues. The right to food is 
enshrined as a fundamental principle of state policy in Article 15 of the Constitution and the country 
has policies for ensuring the right to safe food, but it is not a legal right. The 8F YP highlights foodborne 
diseases and dietary risk exposures arising from pesticide residues in food, use of harmful 
agrochemicals and excessive dose of food preservatives, as areas of concern. Alongside, NCDs 
reportedly account for an estimated 59% of total deaths. With increasing reliance on ready-to-eat and 
processed foods and online shopping for groceries and food delivery in urban areas, ensuring food safety 
is critical. Awareness will be created on all these issues and necessary measures taken (see Aol 3.3.3, 
3.3.4, 4.1.2, 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3). In line with the 8FYP, measures will be initiated to strengthen 
surveillance and response to foodborne diseases of plant and animal origin. Enforcement of the 
Breastmilk Substitutes (BMS) Act - 2013, related byelaws and implementation of complementary 
feeding guidelines will continue, in line with the NNP 2015. The Competition Act passed in 2012 needs 
regulatory frameworks and enforcement. The government will intervene when required, to control 
fluctuation in food prices of essential commodities such as onions'*. Rules will be framed by the 
Competition Commission, to regulate anti-competitive behaviour and arrangements among companies, 
to ensure equitable and inclusive food markets, 
Action Agenda 
 
 1, Adopt consistent practices of integrated nutrient, pest, and crop management 
The 8FYP states that introducing GAP is an unfinished agenda of the 7FYP and establishing it will 
ensure better natural resource use and food safety. GAP Policy was adopted by the government in late 
2020. Awareness and dissemination of good agricultural practices will be undertaken among extension 
workers and farmers for enhancing capacities and uptake of GAPs. To this end, training and technology 
transfer will be provided and promoted on safe and nutritious food to ensure safe levels of chemical and 
pesticide use in crops and thereby reduce risk of foodborne diseases (see also Aol 3.3.4). 
 
 2. Strengthen monitoring and enforcement system under the BMS Act 
The BBF has observed that violation of the BMS Act of 2013 and rules of 2017 is found across the 
country, with BMS products being promoted and marketed in contravention of the ActTM'. The roles and 
responsibilities defined for different actors under the Act will be enforced. A two-pronged approach 
 
*2 Global Times.2019. Bangladesh launches fair price onion outlets to stabilize market. 20 November 
7 Bangladesh Breastfeeding Foundation website. BMS Act 2013 Monitoring, Enforcement and Awareness

will be followed, viz. increasing awareness in the community on cxclusive breastfeeding for the first 
six months followed by appropriate complementary feeding after six months, and penal action aguinist 
promoters and advertisers of BMS. Adequately trained human resources will be crested to. generate 
awareness at the community level, in line with Aol 3.1.3. Measures will be introduced to create an 
enabling environment for women to breastfeed at the workplace and in public spacesTM, 
|3, Enact a Right to Safe Food Act } 
Bangladesh has 4 number of policies on food and food related issues, which require u structured policy 
framework for enforcement. The Bangladesh Law Commission has rocommended cnactmont of a Right 
to Food Act snd constitution of a Food Commission to oversee its implementation. It has also observed 
that sensitisation of policy makers is requiréd to see the relevance and need for such a messure?TM*. 
Keeping in mind the importance of food safety, steps will accordingly be taken to enact a Right to Food 
Act. 
[4. Develop new regulations with guidelines for enforcement, to prevent and control NCDs | 
Following up on the 4th Health, Population and Nutrition Sector Programme (4th HPNSP) Operational 
Plan (OP) Non-Communicable Disease Control (2017), a national STEPS survey*"* in 2018 concluded 
that tatgeted interventions are required to combat the rising burden of NCDs*". Implemeritation of the 
multi-sectoral action plan for prevention and control of NCDa (2018-2025) with a three-year operational 
plan, will be accelerated with focus on the action areas of advocacy, leadership and partnerships; health 
promotion and risk reduction; health systems strengthening for early detection and management of 
NCDs and their risk factors; and surveillance, monitoring and evaluation, and research, An operational 
PoA with regulations and guidelines for enforcement will be developed for the remaining period 2021 
fo 2025, including nutrition labelling, reformulation of food standards limiting high sugar, salt and fat, 
vod banning industrial transfats; restriction of food advertising particularly marketing of unhealthy 
foods to children and imposing tax on sugar sweetened drinks and ultra-processed junk foods. Mass 
awareness will be generated through print and electronic media campaigns giving nutrition advice and 
education on NCDs, 
|S. Formulate enforcement rules under the Competition Act (2012) | 
Lower income groups are impacted more by anti-competitive practices in markets for basic: goods and 
services, Competition policy enforcement is necessary to complement poverty reduction measures*TM. 
In fine with this, enforcement rules will be formulated under the Competition Act (2012) and steps taken 
to creale awareness on competition related capacity building and advocacy, The Competition 
Commission established following the enactment of the Competition Act (2012) will adopt necessary 
measures to cresic awareness of the law amongst all stakeholders, viz. private sector enterprises, 
researchers, consumer groups, gerteral civil society, and relevant government ministries. Rules will be: 
framed to ensure better consumer protection, allow new entreprencurs to join the market, prevent 
unhealthy business prectices in both physical and online markets and undesirable fluctuation in price of 
food commodities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 As recommended by Independent Review Team (2020) 4th Health, Popalation and Nutrition Sector Program (HPNSP) 
217-2022, Mid-Term Review Report April 2020 
3! Bsrigladesh Law Commission, 2025. A Study on Ground Situation of Right to Food in Hanpledexh 
DS STEPwise Surveillance for NCD risk factors {STEPS) is 9 WHOeveloped, standardized framework for monitoring the 
magriitade of NCD cake fictors in a country, It comprises of 3 steps: STEP | determines behavioural risk factors by 
Questintuutitc aisearment, STEP 2 figures cut physical risk factor by physical mesturernenty and STEP 3 finds out 
biochernical risk factors by biochemical measurements. 
231 NIPSOM, GoB & WEO, 2018. Hunyladesh NCD Risk Factor Survey 2018 
> Racgaque, A. 2019; Promoting Competition for Sustainable and Inclusive Development in Hangisdexh, Keynote paper 
prepared for the seminar on The Role of Competition Commission in Sustuimable and Inclusive Development organised by the 
Sangiadesl Competition Commission 
a 1699 |

Cross references 
e NFNSP Aol 3.1.3; 3.3.3; 4.1.2; 5.1.1; 5.1.2; 5.1.3 
NPAN2 
Multi-sectoral action plan for prevention and control of NCDs 2018-2025 with a three-year 
operational Plan 
4th HPNSP Operational Plan (OP) Non-Communicable Disease Control 
BMS Act (2013) and by-laws 
Food Safety Act (2013) 
Competition Act (2012) 
NNP 2015 
PP2041 
8F YP 2020-2025 
NAP 2018 
Aol 5.4.2 Strengthen gender mainstreaming for food and nutrition security 
Rationale 
Recognising and focusing on women for their key role in ensuring FNS across the value chain is one of 
the guiding principles of this PoA. Women account for about half of the work force in agriculture and 
nearly three-fourth of the rural female work force is engaged in agriculture, as per the Labour Force 
Survey (2016-17); a majority however do not have title to land and access to support services. The 
agricultural wage differential was 31.4% in 2018-19*". Further, women belonging to ethnic and 
marginalised communities are generally found to be more food and nutrition insecure. The National 
Women's Development Policy (2011) flagged the need to recognize women's contribution in 
agriculture and remove wage discrimination. The Gender Policy of the NSSS 2018 has recommended 
a 50% share for women for settlement or agriculture in khas lands; the Ministry of Land (MoL) has 
been taking measures to secure women's rights to land. Based on the positive results of the Agriculture, 
Nutrition, and Gender Linkages (ANGeL) pilot project across 16 upazilas in empowering 
women and improving dietary diversity, the MoA is examining scaling it up across the 
country**'. "Capacity building of women, inclusive and gender-sensitive financing arrangements and 
institutional reforms to tackle gender-based inequalities and discrimination", are priorities listed in the 
NENSP (Aol 2.4.1 and 2.4.2). The gender dimension will be integrated in food loss assessment and 
reduction measures under Strategy 5.2 of the PoA. At the institutional level, capacities will be 
strengthened for generating gender disaggregated data at all levels, to enable targeted policy making 
with a socially inclusive approach. 
Action Agenda 
 
1, Strengthen the capacity of BBS to disaggregate data by gender and social groups 
The role of data for a proper understanding of the ground situation of FNS by social group and gender 
to enable targeted policy making especially for poor and vulnerable women is crucial, While numerous 
laws, policies and plans endeavour to address gender equality and women's empowerment, the data and 
statistics needed for monitoring and reporting are not available for many areas, are uneven and/or are 
not updated**'. Steps will be taken to improve gender disaggregated data production by strengthening 
the capacity of BBS on gender statistics, including through data collection on priority data needs such 
 
25% Calculated in the CIP2 MR20 in terms of "male premium": (male wage - female wage)! female wage. 
+49 Dhaka Tribune, 2019. Empowering women in agriculture, 13 April 
"4. UN Women website. How are we making women count in Bangladesh?

as time-use, violence against women, and sex-disaggregated population statistics, to enable gender 
mainstreaming in food systems. 
2. Promote access to land by women 
 
 
As per the Agriculture Census 2008, just 4.6% of all land holdings (farm and non-farm) and 3% of farm 
holdings were headed by women as owners or tenants. Access to land is important for women to have 
access to inputs and support services for agriculture. The MoL has been taking measures for securing 
women their rights on land: by modernizing land records and ensuring inclusion of women's names in 
digitized records, incorporating names of both husband and wife in the lands and houses allocated to 
landless households, ensuring equality in ownership between husband and wife and giving 
comprehensive training that includes understanding of the rights of women, to staff at Land 
Administration Centre. To ensure and protect the ownership and rights of women to land, updating 
Land Records with joint titles will be prioritised while disseminating information and services regarding 
land affairs. Deeds (kabuliat) will be registered in the name of both husband and wife when allocating 
land to rehabilitate landless people. Priority to women or joint ownership of husband and wife will be 
adopted in the Agriculture and Non-agricultural Khas Land Settlement Policy, with priority to poor, 
destitute and physically challenged women. Inclusion of women in management committees of different 
initiatives will be promoted, as mandated for example in the Chingri Mahal Management Policy. 
 3. Ensure wage parity for similar agriculture work done by men and women 
The Labour Force Survey 2016-17 found that in rural areas, the average monthly income of men in 
skilled agriculture, forestry and fishery was 9,549 taka as against 7,803 taka for women. Legislative 
measures will be taken to ensure wage parity with men for similar work done by women in agriculture. 
 
4. Mainstream gender in agriculture extension and scale up Agriculture, Nutrition, and Gender 
Linkages (ANGeL) initiative 
The MoA in collaboration with IFPRI, United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and 
A4NH, piloted a three-year initiative called Agriculture, Nutrition and Gender Linkages (ANGeL) from 
2016-18 in 16 upazilas**. The initiative's design focusing on the gender pathways to link agriculture 
with nutrition, addressed the NAP's thrust areas of promoting crop diversification and production of 
crops with greater nutrition-value by agriculture extension staff, empowering women, encouraging their 
participation in production and marketing for income generation, and improving their FNS status. The 
pilot demonstrated improved production and dietary diversity, farmers' income, and women's 
empowerment in agriculture through greater role in decision making and collectivisation. A national 
programme of agriculture extension will be designed based on the ANGeL approach for scale up across 
the country. 
 
5. Integrate gender dimension into food loss assessment and prevention strategies 
The NFNSP recognises the importance of reducing FLW along the value chain with Strategy 5.2. 
dedicated to this issue. Women play a major role especially in the postharvest phase of food processing 
and value addition and factors inhibiting their access to inputs, technology and other resources influence 
FLW. The gender dimension will be integrated in the FLW assessment exercise and prevention 
strategies developed using tools like FAO's four-step approach for gender-responsive food loss 
reduction, 
Cross references 
e NFNSP Aol 2.4.1; 2.4.2; Strategy 5.2. 
* National Social Security Strategy Gender Policy (2018) 
« National Women's Development Policy (2011) 
 
#2 Society for Bangladesh Agricultural Extension Network website. Good Practice Note - 4 
es 111 8 |

Aol 5.4.3, Develop and promote climate-resilient food systems 
Rationale 
Bangladesh has been witnessing the adverse effects of global warming. Climate change and its 
associated events are expected to further adversely impact on agriculture and rural livelihoods. Intrusion 
of saline water caused by rise in sea level will exacerbate the shortage of suitable agricultural land and 
affect the livelihood of people living in coastal regions. Measures to support climate resilient food 
systems are being carried forward through several initiatives. As discussed under Aol 1.1.1, 4.2.1 and 
5.3.2, the NFNSP will improve climate resilience through promotion of Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), 
provision of improved technologies, information on differential impact on different production 
activities, capacity building and financial support. Inter-ministerial cooperation, convergence, 
partnerships, and coordination are key for this to happen effectively; ongoing initiatives in this direction 
will be strengthened and an enabling policy environment created. The MoEFCC has demonstrated 
enhancement of climate resilience and food security with community participation in coastal areas with 
endeavours such as the Integrating Community-based Adaptation into Afforestation and Reforestation 
(ICBA-AR) project (2016-20) through mangrove forest restoration integrated with livelihood 
promotion. Finance will be raised in partnership with the private sector as recommended by the CIP2 
MR20 and the Climate Fiscal Framework (CFF) 2020. Appropriate innovative fiscal instruments (¢.g., 
tax incentives for low carbon green development, subsidy for green products, and loan and insurance 
products) will be worked out drawing on experiences in other countries, as recommended under CFF 
2020. Execution of the many initiatives formulated requires effective governance based on proper 
understanding of the issues. T'o this end, capacity building on climate adaptation, resilient food systems 
and finance will be undertaken at multiple levels - government officials at national and sub-national 
levels, private sector, NGOs and community at the grassroots, The government will also actively engage 
with the international community for knowledge sharing, raising finance, demonstrating pilots and 
learning from best practices. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Establish National Environment Management Council (NEMC) 
 
In line with the recommendation in the PP2041, a National Environment Management Council 
(NEMC), chaired by the Prime Minister will be established. It will have representatives from the 
ministries of finance, planning, environment and forestry, land, agriculture, water, fisheries and 
livestock, law, energy and power, industry and transport as members, and the department of 
environment will provide the secretariat service. The main function of the NEMC will be to ensure the 
proper integration of environmental concems in the development agenda and monitor implementation 
progress in different sectors including increasing resilience of crop and livestock production systems in 
8 sustainable manner. 
 
 2. Develop water modelling 
Water modelling endeavours will continue in order to further develop solutions for watercourses, water 
supply, storm water and wastewater systems to improve management of water resources. This will help 
with flood control and flood forecasting- especially crucial in areas of the North prone to flash flooding- 
irrigation and drainage, and salinity and sediment issues, It will contribute to the development of 
waterways as means of transport (see Aol 2.1.1.) 
hh?

3, Restore mangroves in coastal areas 
Bangladesh has « coastline of S80 km ucross 19 cogstal districts, With two-thirds of landmass fess than 
five meters above sea level and 30% of its arable land in coastal areas, the country is highly vulnerable 
to sea lovel rise, cyclones, storms, and storm-induced tidal flooding. [t has been demonstrated 
internationally that mangroves act as un effective bio-shield against coastal surges. Mangrove forest 
restoration was a key intervention under the Iotegrating Community-based Adaptation into 
Afforestation and Reforestation (ICBA-AR) project (2016-20) implemented by the McEFCC in 
collaboration with United Nations Development Programme {UNDP)-Global Environmental Facility 
in eight upazilas across five districts, to increase resilience of the coastal community to climate change 
and enhance their food security. The project promoted coastal livelihoods through development of 
fleating fruit and vegetable gardens and fish °°. Based on the evaluation report of the project, steps will 
be taken to expand projects of this type over a wider area, 
 
 
4. Examine and Icarn from green growth strategies for food and agriculture 
The 8FYP is committed to reduction in overuse of chemicals in egriculture, reduce GHG emission, 
follow GAP and put in place 4 Green Growth Strategy, As stated in the Plan, Bangladesh will study and 
learn from UNDP's Green Commodities Program, and the example of other. countries (c.g., Rwanda's 
Greet Growth and Climate Resilience National Strategy for Climate Change and Development to 
establish a low carbon and climate resilient economy by 2050, Chile's National Green Growth 
Strategy), to support its agenda for green growth, Currently, the country has set targets to reduce GHG 
emissions in the power, transport and industry sectors. Agriculture is reported to be a leading contributor 
accounting for 39% of total emissions**, The BCCSAP includes-actions to reduce emissions in the 
agriculture sector (through energy efficiency end water and fertiliser management), and sealing up 
afforestation and reforestation. The updated Nationally Determined Contribution (2020) under 
Preparation will include a target for reduction in GHG from agriculture, which is currently absent. 
 
 
5. Operationalise the Climate Fiscal Framework 2020 
Building on the CFF 2014, the updated CFF 2020 has broadened its remit t include the role of the 
private sector, NGOs and CSOs and partnerships for climate finance,-and laid out-2en implementation 
plan, Jt takes-into account, finance needed for different programmes addressing climate change. The 
CFF implementation plan will be operationalised in earnest to attract finance from across sectors for 
climate resilient food systems. Fiscal policies and moasures like tax, VAT, subsidy and pricing, and 
schemes related to icnding and insurance will be developed, capacity built and supportive institutional 
imingements put in place for their successful implementation. The global investment market will be 
tapped through schemes such as green bonds, to encourage eco-fricndly industricsTM?. 
 
 
 6. Take the lead in addressing climate resilience on the international scene 
The country will take the lead in addressing climate resilience at international forums for knowledge 
sharing, and in leveraging partnerships and funding for action. Bangladesh has essumed the presidency 
of the 48-nation Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) and the Vulnerable Twenty (V20} Group of Finance 
Ministers, The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan to mobilise resources for a sustainable future announced 
in October 2020 ig the first pian of the CVF, The South Asia regional office for the Global Center of 
Adsptation was launched in Dhaku in September 2020. These initiatives will be built on, for bringing 
international focus on Bangladesh's climate vulnerability and the need for global support and action, 
 
 
* Banyindesh Forest Department, 2018, Integrating Community4rased Adaptation inte Afforestation and Reforestation 
(ICBA-AR) Programme in Bangladesh: Co-management and bencfit sharing from coastal afforestation 
** USAID. 2016. Greenhouse Gar Emissions in Bongiadesh, April, 
© Hay, S. 2021, How dv we tap into the global investuieat marker? Ant Grien Bands the answer? 'Ihe Daily Star. 10 March 
113 5)

Cross references: 
NFNSP Aol J,1.1; 4.2.1; 5.3.2 
CFF 2020 
Nationally Determined Contributions 2020 Interim, MoEFCC 
CIP2 2016-2020 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 2009 
CIP-EFCC 2016-21 
CIP2 2016-2020 
PP2041 
BDP 2100 
8FYP 2020-2025 
 
 
 ee oS a ee Bee yah Sea why, 
Aol 5.5.1 Strengthen pelicy uptake, FNS leadership and institutional capacity of relevant 
secretariats and public institutions 
Rationale 
Focusing on FNS secretariats and public institutions, this Aol complements the other Aols in this 
strategy on subnational institutions, private sector actors and partnerships, The current FNS 
institutional structure is strong, but inadequate capacity has hampered analysis and policy 
implementation.** Food safety control is hampered by madequate capacity to lead, technically guide 
and manage actors with fragmented and overlapping responsibilities. Synergies are not maximized in 
the interventions of 22 ministries implementing nutrition-sensitive interventions, and leadership and 
capacity shortfalls limit collaborations with civil society and the private sector on advocacy, service 
delivery, technology solutions, and nutritious food supply chains.**' Bangladesh needs a stronger uptake 
of FNS policy into planning organisations, so that policies are better translated into implementations 
and operations of line ministries and other actors, down to grassroots level, Particularly key are 
capacities in three institutions with inter-linked mandates, namely the BFSA, BNNC, and FPMU. 
Strengthening capacity in these institutions would be catalytic because they provide crucial technical 
services to Bangladesh's FNS governance architecture. Further strengthening of capacities of these 
institutions are needed to support the wider scope of the NFNSP. Moreover, there is a need to "close 
the loop on monitoring" so that lessons irom Bangladesh's results-based monitoring efforts lead to 
informed leadership that ensures "course corrections" to align implementation closely to policy goals. 
Support to the SUN Multi-sectoral Platform that is led by MoHFW needs to continue to enable 
improved coordination and strengthened linkages between nutrition specific and nutrition sensitive 
policy frameworks and interventions to help scale up nutrition programmes. Widening active 
participation in the LCGs which coordinate development assistance, including technical assistance, and 
include various sector-specific subgroups, would help in the uptake of the PoA by a wider range of 
actors, 
Action Agenda 
1. Strengthen capacities of the Bangladesh Food Safety Authority 
 
 
The Bangladesh Food Safety Act 2013 established BFSA, the National Food Safety Management 
Advisory Council, and the Central Food Safety Management Coordination Committee. BFSA is crucial 
for policy uptake and implementation, as it provides technical services to the other two bodies which 
provide direction, oversight and coordination. BFSA capacity to assume operational responsibility for 
 
4 USAID .2014, Institutional Architecture for Food Security Policy Change: Bangladesh. USAID, Dhaka 
*) BNNC (2020), Monitoring Report 2018-19: Second National Pian of Action for Nutrition. Government of Bangladesh 
1s ae

food safety implementation need to be strengthened and coordinated with MoHFW to avoid 
duplications." Accordingly, leadership and institutional capacities are essential to ensure that policies 
on food safety do indeed become tangible and effective implementations. Attention so far has been on 
product safety, and more attention is needed for effectiveness in other areas such as field programmes, 
surveillance and analytical capabilities. BFSA needs to collaborate with 1] or more ministries and 
hundreds of field units. There is need to make optimal use of the food safety regulatory reforms that 
Bangladesh has started. Changes must be accompanied by effective facilitation with a focus on 
outcomes rather than on output, The food safety regulatory reforms should be complemented by 
adequate manpower who are equipped with appropriate capacities. Periodic trainings on food safety 
standards, and procedures will be undertaken to build capacity of the agencies entrusted with ensuring 
safe food. 
 
2. Strengthen capacities of BNNC 
The NNP 2015 identified BNNC as lead agency to implement the NPAN2 in collaboration with 22 
ministries and departments , under chairmanship of the Prime Minister's Office (PMO), with functions 
including convening nutrition partners, and coordinating the development, implementation and 
monitoring of national nutrition policies and programmes. BNNC among other policy functions, has 
focused on nutrition governance both at national and sub-national level by improving horizontal 
coordination (across line ministries, platform meetings, executive committee and standing technical 
committee, SUN Networks, etc.) and vertical coordination (with DNCCs and UNCCs). Strengthening 
BNNC is needed as the apex body for nutrition in Bangladesh to provide technical support to 
multistakeholder and multisectoral collaborations as envisaged under NPAN2."*9 
 3. Strengthen capacities of the Food Planning and Monitoring Unit 
The FPMU under the MoFood is responsible for providing overall technical and administrative support 
on FNS in Bangladesh. It is responsible for monitoring the FNS situation in Bangladesh, storing and 
disseminating knowledge on FNS, and delivering evidence-based policy advice on FNS issues. FPMU 
serves as the secretariat to the FPMC, which is responsible for providing overall leadership and 
oversight in all aspects of FNS, under the chairpersonship of the Minister for Food. Efforts need to 
follow up on strengthening specialist capacity in the different FPMU wings, cach of which has specific 
food security relevant functions, in addition to the overall FNS system support that FPMU provides. 
 
4. Assess and monitor the capacities of the FNS governance system 
Whilst BFSA, BNNC and FPMU need specialised capacity strengthening for their specialised technical 
roles, there is also a need to ensure "the parts add up to the desired whole" of a strengthened FNS 
governance system. This is needed, for example, to ensure that separate capacity strengthening efforts 
do not sustain institutional silos, but rather reinforce linkages between each other, and beyond to other 
organisations working in FNS. In order to do this, a baseline measurement/ assessment of existing 
capacity of the whole FNS governance system will be done, followed by annual or regular monitoring 
of capacity gains in key organisations, including BFSA, BNNC and FPMU, but also including actors 
across the whole FNS system. An independent and technical approach is needed, with strong conceptual 
framework and indicators suitable for monitoring, with the purpose of sustained and system-wide 
capacity strengthening." The mandate for this role could be potentially assigned to GED, Cabinet 
Division, IMED or another cross-government body, and could be linked to the government's public 
administration effectiveness tools, such as the Annual Performance Agreements. 
5. Use the FNS CIP Monitoring Reports to annually re-align FNS investments to NFNSP 
goals 
 
 
The annual Monitoring Reports (MR) of the FNS-CIP will be better used to identify new projects, and 
thereby help align the Government's investments more closely to NFNSP goals. The MRs annually 
 
*" FAO, 2017, Bangladesh Food Safety Cluster Evaluation. Office of Evaluation, FAO, Rome 
+ Bangladesh National Nutrition Council (2020). Assessment of the Key Bottlenecks for the Coverage of Nutrition Sensitive 
Interventions and the Underlying Causes. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Bangladesh 
280 World Bank. 2012, Guide to Evaluating Capacity Development Results; FAO. 2007, Evaluating the Impact of Capacity 
Building Activities in the field of Food Quality and Safety. FAO, Rome 
a 1159!

track both FNS results and project investments.**' Currently this information is under used as a forward- 
looking planning tool, Gaps identified in the MR of the FNS-CIP will be consolidated with the MR of 
the NPAN2, with coordination between FPMU and BNNC, and this will lead to proposals for annual 
adjustments to the FNS investments portfolio, which will be channelled to the FPMC for approval. A 
Public Expenditure Review for Nutrition could be done to update the 2019 report, as part of this 
process.** The MR of the FNS-CIP is published around June each year, reporting investment data up 
to the end of the previous fiscal year, i.e.,lagged by one year, and this time-gap could be reduced with 
more timely data sharing, such as by adapting ERD's AIMS (for development partner projects) and 
collaborating with Finance Division for data on the Annual Development Program (currently shared 
through the Annual Development Programme (ADP) book published in April of a given year).*" This 
data sharing would be consistent with enhanced Government-to-Government (G2G) services in the e- 
Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh 2019. This is linked to Aol 5.3.1 on FNS data sharing. 
6. Broaden participation of Local Consultative Groups (LCG) on Agriculture, Rural 
Development and Food Security (ARDFS), Disaster Emergency Response (DER) and 
Health 
 
 
The LCGs exist to foster coordination between DPs and the Government, This PoA has a broader and 
more comprehensive multisectoral and multi-stakeholder approach, Consequently, on some issues there 
may arise need to ensure a stronger and wider participation in the LCG on ARDFS, the LCG on DER, 
and the Health and Nutrition Consortium which is a health related LCG, Wider and more active 
participation in the LCGs by civil society and the private sector will be sought, The Health and Nutrition 
Consortium is updated on FNS but has tended to focus on health issues. It is important to ensure that 
nutrition related issues are more often brought up for discussion along with funding considerations and 
investments. The Food Security Cluster deliberations and issues analysed also needs to feed into the 
LCG process. 
Cross references 
e-Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh 2019 
NPAN2 
Aol 5.5.2. Strengthen the capacities at subnational level including local government, non-state 
actors and consumer associations by facilitating knowledge exchange and partnerships 
Rationale 
Local institutions, including government, civil society, private sector and consumer associations, hold 
key roles in the successful planning, execution and monitoring of FNS projects through their leadership, 
technical knowledge and partnerships. Whilst successful implementation of the HPNSDP and the NFP- 
PoA attest to national capacities, subnational/local level capacities are insufficient, particularly to 
formulate projects, implement them and measure results. In addition, partnerships are weak or lacking, 
and measures are needed to enhance multisectoral horizontal and vertical coordimation, to fully 
mainstream FNS national frameworks into coordinated actions of all local actors. Partly due to the 
limited guidance from national authorities, multisectoral coordination is inadequate at district and 
upazila level.*** Coordination between local government and NGOs occurs mostly out of need since 
resources are shared, although this is not recognised in financial or programming decisions.*** As part 
 
3! Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), 2019. Roadmap to the 2020 Monitoring Report of the Second Country 
Investment Plan on Nutrition-Sensitive Food Systems. Ministry of Food. Government of Bangladesh (with FAO- MUCH 
Project) 
232 Finance Division. 2019. Bangladesh Public Expenditure Review on Nutrition 2019. Ministry of Finance, Government of 
Bangladesh 
3 Ministry of Finance, 2013, Budget Booklet. Government of Bangladesh 
*4 Rose, J, & K. Robbins. 2014. Nutrition Governance in Bangladesh: A National and Upazila-level Assessment. Save the 
Children Technical Report 
** Taylor, L. 2012. "The nutrition agenda in Bangladesh: "Too massive to handle?'!"" Analysing Nutrition Governance: 
Bangladesh Country Report. Institute of Development Studies

of coordination, a clear division of responsibilities is needed to strengthen the interface between local 
and national government officials, including delineation of the role of NGOs in implementing 
Government programmes. Initiatives that involve the collaboration of all local stakeholders, including 
in monitoring progress, are more likely to succeed, and gain sustained technical and financial support. 
All four actions proposed here relate to strategies and objectives in the Local Government and Rural 
Development Sector Strategy Paper (2018), National Strategy for Pourashava Governance 
Improvement 2016-2025, the Upazila Act and the Union Parishad Act. This includes actions to clarify 
functions and responsibilities, to enhance knowledge and capacity as well as structures for governance 
and coordination of local actors. 
Action Agenda 
 
1, Review and assess the role of local institutions in achieving FNS 
Local institutions contributing to FNS need to be mapped and their FNS-relevant activities recorded 
and categorised according to NFNSP-PoA strategies and initiatives, in collaboration with the umbrella 
organisation planned under Aol 5.5.4, This will help streamline current efforts, avoid duplication of 
efforts and exploit synergies through partnerships. The service delivery capacity of different actors will 
be looked into with the identification of their current/potential engagement. An effort will be made to 
gauge bottlenecks in their local level operation and management, and their dependence on external state 
and non-state actors estimated, The role of public offices and local government authorities" and their 
capacity constraints in supervisory, regulatory and FNS promotional activities will be examined. A clear 
division of responsibilities, both horizontally and vertically, will be proposed and agreed with key actors. 
 
 2. Develop a capacity development plan along with learning resources 
FNS development orientation training course design for local leaders, enablers and public officials will 
be organised. Learning materials, trainers, demonstration resources to appraise sectoral subject matter 
and cross-sectoral issues will be developed in order to guide and promote non-state or private FNS 
interventions. Guidance will be supplied on establishing planning, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of local level implementation of national, multi-sectoral, sectoral and locally initiated FNS 
development efforts. Support will also be provided to assure better function of FNS development 
networks and establish coordination committees with effecting decision-making process and effective 
secretarial services and follow up mechanisms for timely implementation of a jointly agreed action 
agenda. 
 
3. Implement a capacity enhancement strategy for FNS stakeholders including measures to 
promote partnerships and collaboration 
Capacity enhancement activities needed for building synergistic conditions to work with cross-sectoral 
and sectoral partners in joint implementation of FNS initiatives will be implemented. Workshops and 
training programmes, including exchange visits, fellowships and human resource time sharing will be 
organised. Measures will be taken to promote partnerships and collaboration between local 
stakeholders: government or non-state (civil society and private sector organizations) and consumer 
associations. Formal communication mechanisms and information exchange facilities amongst 
participating institutions will be developed and the creation and operationalisation of collaborative 
platforms explored. A monitoring, evaluation and learning mechanism will be established, with regular 
reports on actions undertaken to improye service delivery capacity, multi-sectoral coordination and 
partnership building. 
Cross references 
e NEFNSP PoA: Aol 5.5.4. 
Local Government and Rural Development Sector Strategy Paper 2018 
National Strategy for Pourashava Governance Improvement 2016-2025 
Upazila Act and the Union Parishad Act 1998 (amended 2011) 
es 117 1 |

Aol 5.5.3. Strengthen private sector capacity by promoting the transfer of technologies and 
knowledge 
Rationale 
Given the private sector's role at all stages of the FVC, its capacity to contribute to executing the 
commitments made in the NFNSP and other national strategies is paramountTM', The private sector has 
a crucial role in making food available. Aside from the PFDS, it also handles all trade of agricultural 
commodities and food and the majority of its processing and marketing. The corporate social 
responsibility of private companies can be enhanced with regard to healthy product development and 
marketing, especially in the case of fortified and nutrient-enriched foods (see Aol 2.3.2.) or biofortified 
seeds (see Aol 1.1.1.). Harnessing new technologies and innovations can potentially offer convenient, 
cost effective, and scalable solutions. New forms of mechanisation and breeding can help modernise 
agriculture, New technologies to process and preserve food can lengthen its shelf life, ensure hygienic 
quality, restoration of nutrients and enable its wider distribution. Building a sustainable food system 
thus requires that private actors are able to use and access innovative technologies and knowledge in an 
efficient mannerTM', Technology and knowledge transfer to private agents must be enabled and 
promoted, and bottlenecks preventing these transfers from happening identified and removed?TM. The 
transmission of knowledge may take place between private sector agents, from the public to the private 
sector, and nationally or internationally. In particular, public investment in R&D and subsequent transfer of 
technology and knowledge to private actors is essential where it is likely to produce public benefits and 
where private agents may not be able or willing to take on such investments, because costs outweigh 
their potential benefit. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Identify bottlenecks and catalysts of knowledge and technology transfer to the private 
sector 
Transfers to and adoption by the private sector of innovations and new technologies may be thwarted 
or conversely, encouraged, by a number of factors that need to be identified. These factors depend on 
the characteristics of different private agents: for instance, where they are placed in the supply chain 
(farmer, food processor, retailer, etc.), and their size (marginal farmer, supermarket chain, étc.). 
Economic, structural, behavioural and policy factors may come into play to explain what leads private 
agents to adopt -or not- new technologies, and this needs to be explored. The lack of property rights on 
some of the inputs- land in the case of farmers for example- can inhibit untapping the potential of R&D 
transfers. Exogenous factors can have a role in facilitating knowledge transfer: for example, there is 
evidence, such as in the aftermath of the Jamuna bridge construction, that improved connectivity 
facilitates technology adoption. This needs to be investigated, In some cases, market imperfections such 
as the lack of access to credit (see Aol 1.1,4.), may prevent technology adoption by creating financial 
barriers. Another element that needs to be understood is how demand from consumers will influence 
whether actors along the food chain will be willing to adopt more advanced technologies or use new 
knowledge considering this may imply investments and higher costs. Consumers who are unaware of 
the importance of food safety and quality, will not be willing to pay the premium associated with these 
characteristics, giving little incentives to producers to change their ways in order to improve their 
quality standards. Initiatives such as innovation fairs may be held on a regular basis to facilitate the 
testing and uptake of technologies developed by academia and by the private sector, and promote funding of 
further research. 
 
** Grindatto, G.M. 2018, Ending malnutrition: what role for the private sector? SDG2 Advocacy Hub 
*5? World Bank. 2020. Promoting Agri-Food Sector Transformation in Bangladesh: Policy and Investment Priorities 
25° Word Bank. 2004. Transfer of technology to developing countries: unilateral and multilateral policy options. World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper 3332.

2, Conduct a policy review 
The policy environment also plays a role in creating conditions that are more conducive to knowledge 
transfers and a comprehensive policy review is therefore needed. The National Science and Technology 
Policy dates from 2011 and may require updating. Other relevant policy instruments may also affect 
this area and need review. 
 
 
 3. Enhance access to extension advice through innovations and use of digital technologies 
Technology villages will be established in all upazilas (as per Aol 1.5.2 of the NAP PoA 2020). 
Extension services play a key role in getting information on new techniques and innovations down to 
farm level. The capacity of extension services thus needs to be strengthened and their knowledge kept 
updated so that they can propose practical solutions. [CTs are essential for extension service delivery, 
especially for hard-to-reach users. PPPs may have a role to play given the role of the private sector such 
as input dealers, in the provision of extension services to farmers. Increasing public-private coordination 
can help accelerate the dissemination of technologies developed by the public sector and NARS in 
particular. Promoting cooperatives (as advocated in Aol 1.1.9) can help smaller actors engage more 
with their suppliers (seed suppliers for example) and with research institutions, inorder to benefit from 
knowledge transfer, 
 
4. Promote international technology transfers (in line with Aol 3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.3.6 of the NAP 
PoA 2020) 
The Government will actively seek partnerships with other countries in order to promote North-South 
and South-South technology transfers. CGIAR will be called upon to facilitate these transfers learning 
from recent successful experiences such as the Hybrid Rice Development Consortium (HRDC), started 
in 2014, where the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and Advanced Chemical Industries Ltd. 
(ACI) partnered to enhance the dissemination of hybrid rice technology. 
 
 
5. Improve the investment climate 
By creating an environment that is conducive to Investment in the agri-food sector, including foreign 
investment (see Aol 2.2.3), knowledge transfers are likely to increase cither directly or through spill 
overs that will benefit the food system. Bangladesh's ranking in the World Economic Forum's 2019 
Global Competitiveness Index is 105" out of 141 countries, leaving much scope for improvement in 
most of the components of this index (for example on ICT adoption, skills, business dynamism and 
innovation capacity), This may involve changes in law and regulations. It may also involve public 
investments such as infrastructure (roads, markets) which will create an environment that is appealing 
to investors. 
Cross references 
@ NEFNSP PoA:; Aol 1.1.1.5 1.1.4.; 1.1.9; 2.2.3.; 2.3.2, 
¢ NAP PoA 2020; Aol 1.5.2, Efficient transfer of agricultural technology in each of the districts; 
Aol 3.3.4. Partnership with CGIAR institutions; Aol 3.3.5. Partnership with international 
and national organisations; 3.3.6. South-South partnerships 
Aol 5.5.4, Establish frameworks for national and subnational FNS stakeholder partnerships to 
ensure mutual accountability, transparency and effectiveness and operationalise an umbrella 
organization for the active engagement of stakeholders, especially youth 
Rationale 
Food systems involve different stakeholders - farmers, industry, government, academia, and NGOs - 
who by partnering with each other, can help attain the FNS goals of the country. Working together 
allows greater variety of expertise, perspectives and resources to be pulled in order to achieve common 
goals, Partnerships can take a host of shapes with their own type of cross-sector collaboration: public- 
es 119 |

non-profit, private-private (P2P), public-private, private-non-profit, tripartite, and multi-stakeholder 
parinerships. They can be subnational, national and intemational. Bangladesh has long been a pioneer 
in multi-sector and multi-stakeholder partnerships engaging the government, businesses and civil 
society as demonstrated in the CIP2 2016-2020 implementation and monitoring. The role of the 
government is crucial to guiding through policy and legislation but also to investing in goods and 
services that other stakeholders cannot afford (see Aol 5.5.3), The private commercial sector holds a 
key role in FNS given the limited public sector resources yet there are still very few ongoing instances 
of PPPs relevant to FNS. Any partnership will typically involve some degree of risk taking which need 
to be mitigated by adequate frameworks that can help ensure mutual accountability, transparency and 
effectiveness." Institutions to bring together FNS actors such as the FBCCI or the Bangladesh 
Supermarket Owners' Association are limited in their scope. While FPMU has been leading a multi- 
agency government coordination mechanism since the onset of the NFP 2006, there is need for a broader 
institution that would bring together all FNS stakeholders, including smaller and subnational ones, in 
order to support and coordinate their work, exploit synergies, avoid duplication of efforts and encourage 
learning. 
Action Agenda 
 
1. Harmonise the understanding of the goals and objectives of the NFNSP 
 
In order to establish an environment where stakeholders want to engage in partnerships in a way that 
will benefit them as well as contribute to achieving the goals and objectives of the NFNSP, it is 
important that the understanding of these is harmonised across actors. This requires capacity building 
and advocacy activities across all sectors of society. Different stakeholders must be sensitised to their 
social responsibility, especially youth to ensure a long-term impact, while keeping in mind their own 
purpose and objectives, and how these elements may be reconciled. 
 2. Establish rules for partnerships, an accreditation system and monitoring 
The enabling environment for partnerships needs to be developed. First, rules and obligations in 
parinerships need to be defined, Second an accreditation system needs to be created to guarantee the 
standards of the services and goods provided by those in the partnership. Third, standards, effectiveness 
and efficacy of partnerships will need to be assessed regularly. Establishing this will require cross- 
government collaboration and partnership in oversight functions. A simple system of coordination 
through Memoranda of Understanding can be put in place. Partnerships within government institutions 
often risk being impeded or slowed down by administrative obstruction and the lack of bureaucratic 
flexibility. It is thus important that for such partnerships, focal point officials be appointed in line 
ministries and departments to manage coordination and given due authority to act. 
 
3. Raise the profile of the PPP programme and promote increased flow of private investment 
(as per Strategic Objective 3 of the PPP Authority Annual Performance Agreement (PPPA 
APA)) 
In order the specifically encourage public-private partnerships in the field of FNS, efforts will be made 
to raise the profile of PPPs and incentives will be put in place to encourage private investment that 
contributes to the NFNSP (see Aol 2.3.3,). A key partner in this should be the Public Private Partnership 
Authority (PPPA). A legal and regulatory framework as per the Public-Private Partnership Act 2015 
will be developed in order to build confidence among private investors by delineating the rights of both 
the government and private companies, and thus reassure the public and private investors against 
conflicts of interest. The Public-Private Partnership Act 2015 endeavours to facilitate the development 
of the country's core sector public infrastructure and services. The 2020-21 Budget plans revisions to it 
to further promote this type of partnerships. This provides a legal regime to facilitate private investment. 
 
* Institute of Medicine (US), 2012. Building Public-Private Partnerships in Food and Nutrition: Workshop Summary. 
Washington DC: Nations! Academies Press (US); Why Partner?

A Policy for Implementing PPP Projects through Government to Government (G2G) partnership was 
also approved in 2017 to build on strong bilateral relationships with other Governments. Guidelines, 
rules, regulations, procedures and office orders must be established as foreseen in the PPP Act 2015, in 
order to effectively manage such collaborations in a way that will render them a usual modus operandi 
within the government rather than an exception. Efforts should be made to limit the weight of 
bureaucracy in establishing partnerships so as to not hinder potential partnerships. Experience from 
other countries should be drawn upon in specific areas. For example, PPPs towards FLW reduction and 
food waste recycling are common in Asia-Pacific economies. 
 
4. Expand cooperation with NGOs, especially for nutrition services 
The widespread networks of NGOs, even in remote areas, constitute a tremendous asset for the country, 
whose potential must be exploited further through collaboration within established rules. The Bureau 
of NGO Affairs will continue to play a major role in in scaling up the service delivery across the country, 
For particular areas of FNS such as nutrition services, partnership with NGOs will be critical to expand 
the reach of community clinics in rural areas. These partnerships are also critical in urban areas to 
address urban nutrition, with targeted emphasis on slum areas. A community-based mechanism linked 
with government service delivery programmes and structures and private sector linkages will be 
developed. 
 
5. Establish and operationalise an umbrella organization 
An umbrella organisation that can bring together multitude of actors or groups into cohesive entities is 
required to streamline the diverse efforts taking place in the country to try and tackle the causes and 
underlying factors of food and nutrition insecurity. This involves all the ministries working on FNS, 
NGOs, academia, research institutions, other CSOs, and the private sector, both at subnational, national 
and international levels. This will require careful thinking and consensus on the best setup in terms of 
purpose and role, size, location, structure, role and governance arrangement of this organization. While 
choices will need to be made with regards to the scope of the work of this institution given the breadth 
the issue of FNS, one of its important roles will be to actively engage stakeholders such as associations, 
clubs, foundations, platforms and other institutions, especially youth. The role and engagement of the 
FBCCI will be key for instance which need to be strengthened. Resources will be allocated for the setup 
of this institution and its operationalisation, Mechanisms to ensure regular and durable funding will 
need to be put in place to ensure it is able to commit to long-term endeavours, 
Cross references 
e NFNSP PoA: Aol 2.3.3.; 5.5.3, 
e Bangladesh Public-Private Partnership Act 2015 
e Policy for Implementing PPP Projects through Government to Government (G2G) 
Partnership 2017 
e PPPA APA 2018-2019 Strategic Objective 3 
SB

7. NENSP Plan of Action Matrix 
This section consists of matrices corresponding to each one of the Aols for which narratives were provided in the previous chapter. This is preceded by 
goal and outcome level indicators towards the monitoring exercise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOAL LEVEL 
indicators Target Means of verification 
Prevalence of Undernourishment (PoU) (SDG indicator 2.1.1.) 12% by 2025 FAO, SOFI and FAOSTAT 
10% by 2030 
(as per SDG Tracker) 
Prevalence of moderate and severe food insecurity in the population, based on the Food | Docreasing over time FAO, SOFI and FAOSTAT 
Insecurity Experience Scale -FIES (SDG indicator 2.1.2) (FAO) 
Prevalence of stunting (height for age <-2 SD from the median of the World Health Organization | 20% by 2025 (baseline 30.8% in 2017-18) BDHS, SID/BBS 
(WHO) Child Growth Standards) among children under 5 years of age (SDG indicator 2.2.1) 15.5% by 2030 
(5 per. 
Prevalence of wasting among children under 5 years of age (<-2 SD of weight for height) (SDG | 7% by 2025 (baseline 8.4% in 2017-18) BDHS, SID/BBS 
indicator 2.2.2) Less than 5% by 2030 
fo 122 ff j

OBJECTIVE LEVEL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective iT tudicators Target I Means of verification 
1.To ensure availability of * Rice import dependency (imporvavailability) + 0% (baseline 3.5% for 2018/19) +» FPMU, MISM, BBS 
safe and nutritious food + Agricultural sector GDP growth rate (%) * 3.9% in 2025 (baseline 3.9% in 2018/19) » BBS 
for healthy diets 3) Crop and horticulture a) thd - BBS 
b) Fisheries b) thd 
¢) Livestock c) thd 
d) Forestry d) thd 
» Share of non-rice value added in total food value added in current price | « Increasing 
10 rove access a + Average annual CPI inflation rate ' sachs - 2025 as por 8FYP (baseline 5.7.% for | + Bangladesh Bank 
safe and nutritious food at . i jcultural tate of mal icultural labourers + Bangladesh Bank/ DAM/ BBS 
an affordable price aa food) Rie SN Ewa + 7.8% by 2025 (per capita real GDP growth rate + | * a eee 
*SDG 2.¢.1; Change in Indicator of Food Price Anomalics (IFPA for o.sy" 't's 
rice) «Stable: OS SD of mesn (baseline -1.17°'in 
2018/19) 
3.To enhance the consump~ | « National DEL from cereals - » HIES, BBS 
tion and utilisation of "Proportion of households consuming adequately iodised salt (ie,, | "°°" by 2030 as per desirable intake in the | . National Micronutrient Survey/ healthy and diversified diets containing at least 15 pom) national FBDG (bascline 66% in 2016) Health Bulletin (MoHFW), MICS 
for BENE TIEE DAEMON e Proportion of women with mimimum dictary diversity (using MDD-W) * 90% by 2025 as per NPAN2 (baseline 30.5%) (BBS), MolInd 
5 ear *% of children aged 6-23 months receiving MAD | 75% by 2030 as per NPAN2 (baseline from | . 13D, NIPN, FAO Ad hoc survey * Proportion of population using safely managed drinking FSNSP 2015; 46%)) «es, | *BDHS 
water services (in line with 8F YP and SDG 6.1.1) . Bony 40% by 2025 as per NPAN2 G4% in | | SDG tracker (MICS BBS) 
* 100% by 2030 as per SDG Target 6.1 (47.9% in 
2019) 
4.To increase access to » Proportion of population living below national poverty line + 12% by 2025 and 7% by 2030 (baseline 20.5% | *SDG National Priority Target 2, 
oat escort eo + Ratio of income of top 10% population and bottom 10% population estimate for 2018/19) SDG Tracker . . ; life cycle with » focus f Budget allocation for social protection for the poor (excluding civil | * 20 by 2030 (baseline 37,8 for 2016) *SDG National Priority Target 28, 
on vulnerable groups and service pensions) + 2% OF GDP by 2025 as per 8FYP (baseline 1.2% | SDG Tracker 
region . in 2018/19) » MoF 
 
 
2 According to the 8FYP, the GDP growth rate is projected at $.51% in 2025, Factoring in the projected population growth rate (1.18%), the target is computed as: 1.18 + 0,S~7,8% 
761 Calculations based on the FAO-GIEWS methodology. 
es 12311

| *Number of annual high level FNS policy: reports produced (eg., | * Atleast 2 per year * FPMU monitoring 
aoe ae Sect ral | NFNSP Monitoring Report, NPAN 2 Monitoring Report, SUN Annual | (baseline 18/19:2) -BSTI sinstton,- Report) ' Increase (baseline 72 in 2018/19) * MoFood, BBS 
sepactty belgie sad + Number of certified foods /food products certified-as per mandatory | * Decline » SEXG tracker 
partnership for effective standards by BST! + 100% (baseline 47% in 2021) + Climate Budget and Gender 
palkcy eos Mea * Food Waste and Loss Index * Increase Bascline 2020/21; Budgel, MoF 
: : + Proportion of SDG FNS-televant indicators available gender climate + FPMU 
+ Allocution for climate resilience and gender mainstreaming across | 3.9% 37.1% 
ministries -MoA, MoFL, MoFood, MoWCA, Health Setvices 31.4% 30.5% « Number of meetings of the LCGs on FNS (ARDFS, DER and Health) 34% 2.9% 
38.1% 12.9% 
2.7% 2.7% 
*At least 3 per year for each relevant LCG 
(baseline: & in 2020/21) 
 
 
*82 For this indicator, the availability of the 19 SDG indicators listed in FAO's 2019 Tracking provress on food and agriculture-related SDG indicators is considered. As of April 2021, 9 are 
available i.c,, 47% of 19. 
a 124i |

De ee ele Bee) ts eaiad 
0¢ le ensuring sustainable | 
 
 
 
Targets Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
 
 
 
'ira srease productivity whi sustainable production of cereal nutritivus food inciudt horticulture, fisheries and vestoc ; 
1 A. Develop I. Develop stress-tolerant high-yielding varieties of wafer capetls and . New improved +n, of new improved « MoA and *MoA 
improved nutrient-dense crops such as pulses, oilseeds, soybeans, fruits and breeds of crop varicties MoFL * MoFL 
climate-smart vegetables (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Programme |.!. and 3.2) livestock and +n. of new improved | reports * BARC and the 10 
technologies for | « Support and leverage work of research institutes ST- LT fia breeds for livestock NARS institutes 
productivity + Emphasise development of stress-tolerant rice varicties suited specific + 5% ares under and fish + Agricultural 
gains, goographics & farming conditions biofortified « Share of area under Universities: 
agricultural + Continue developing improved varieties of rice, legume and pulses that are crops by 2025 biofortitied crops * CIMMYT 
diversification, nutrient-rich (as por NAP over total * BWMRI 
sustainable + Encourage research in private firms PoA 2020 cultivated area * ICRISAT 
ream 2 Improve crop, soil and natural resources management practices target) : Sn as 
enhancement of | ¢/sding mechanization and "high tech" options to ensure high - DPs 
nutrient content productivity and sustainability (cross-reference to Aol 1.1.5.) SteLt «NGOs 
* Continue developing crop, water, soil and natural resource management ° 
options adapted to different agro-ccology of Bangladesh 
+ Increase officiency of input use through "high-tech" approaches 
+ Encourage investments for development of resource and energy efficient 
agricultural machinery 
+ Customise equipment to the specific needs of farmers (in line with NAP PoA MT-LT 
2020 Programme 2.2,1) 
3. Develop of improved breeds of livestock and fish and improved 
husbandry practices 
* Apply science-led modern breeding methods ST- LT 
+ Improve manigement systems 
+ Support and leverage BLRI's work 
* Develop local adapted breeds of livestock into high-yielding breeds 
* Develop an indigenous gene fish bank 
4. Develop biofortification to increase the nutrient-density of major food | ST- 
items (ace Aol 1.1.2.) MT 
1.1.2. I. Strengthen capacities of extension workers to better meet priorities + Farmers, +n. of fernale * DAE, DLS * MoA-DAE, 
Disseminate + Map EAS needs st including poor extension workers and DoF DAM, BADC, 
improved » Train extension workers on priority topics farmers, women, | +n. of farmers reports AIS 
technologies + Develop multidisciplinary extension skills across livestock, fisheries, and and youth, have trained on + MoFL-DLS, and practices at | crops ST- LT access to sustainable DoF, BLRI 
alrite * Strengthen nutrition-sensitivity in extension service improved EAS practices by DAE 
 
ee 125 8 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification and stakeholders 
through 2. Increase inclusion of poor farmers, women and youth in extension (CIP2 indicutor), * BARC, SRDI and 
effective and services DLS and by DoF other NARS 
participatory + Strengthen inclusion measures ST-LT Institutes 
extension * Recruit more female extension workers « Private sector 
services 3. Strengthen demand-led extension services * FAO and other 
+ Promote decentralized and local-level planning ST- LT A Ser) 4 
+ Mainstream participatory extension approaches Nie 
+ Strengthen Agricultural Technical Committees 
4, Strengthen public-private-NGO partnerships 
+ Monitor and advise on BAS in contract farming 
+ Train NGOs und private sector to deliver higher quality EAS ST-LT 
+ Strengthen coordination rote of Agricultural Extension Planning 
Committees 
5. Enhance the use of ICT 
+ Expand e-agriculture and FIACs 
+ Expand use of audio-visual and mass media ST- LT 
+ Expand use of ICT in MIS and knowledge management 
« Strengthen capacity of EAS workers on ICT use 
1, Increase surface water usage, enhance water conservation and increase Entire country i: | + Arable land under *MoLGDRC' | *MoLGDRC- 1.1.3. Expand water use effick (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Area of I 4 covered by surface irrigation reports LGED 
aad promote the) 1°) > oad CiP? Programme 1.2) OLLI water saving (as per NFP CIP2) | »MoWR - MoWR-BWDB, use of water- es Sree fas wecaase . technology for + Water-use reports WARPO efficient and + Integrate rainwater with hydroponic cultivation ST- MT irrigation (as per | officiency (as per « MoA-BMDA, 
environmentally | * Svild new reservoirs and repair old ones; develop suitable storage NAP PoA 2020) | NEP CIP2) BADC, DAE 
friendly « Diasernisate intigation methods titet consume less weier *25% reduction | *% of dicsel pumps + PMO- PPPA alternative + In witer scarce areas, promote drips and micro-irrigation in diese! pump okornulencal 
irrigation + Adapt approaches to regional characteristics ¢.g. portable irrigation in char sets by 2022 PETS 
technologies, areas (NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.4.4). followed by. Universities including. * Focus on rainfed aus and aman rather than irigation intensive boro rice ST-LT 50% in 2025 & + Private sector 
surface + Conserve rainwater for irrigation in cases of drought 75% by 2030 (in *re 
irrigation + Protect forest and encourage tree planting line with NAP + NGOs INGOs 
2. Develop and promote new technologies and infrastructure FORA) * Collaborate with private sector R&D; learn from other countries' ST- LT 
expericnce ¢.g., precision irigstion using scnsors, [CT-based and digital 
solutions 
* Disseminate these new technologies 
+ Continue large infrastructure projects to ensure countrywide irrigation ¢.z., 
excavation and re-excavation of canals and rivers 
ee 126 8 |

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities 
ry Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
mnsible actor 
and stakcholders 
3. Facilitate access to sustainable irrigation technology 
+ Expose farmers to sustainable technology; provide financing for necessary 
investments (in line with Aol 1.1.4); promote formation of groups and 
cooperatives (in line with Aol 1.1.9) for better access to infrastructure and 
more cifective maintenance and mansgement (PP2041) 
* Focus on numa! women's access and participation to imigation 
* Favour access to clean and sustainable technologies ¢.g., solar powered 
imigation pumps (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 2.2.2.) 
4, Adjust incentives to promote clean, efficient and sustainable irrigation 
(see Aol 1.1.5) 
ST- LT 
 
 
1.1.4. Improve 
timely access to 
credit including 
micro-credit, to 
small-scale 
producers 
through suitable 
institutional 
reforms 
 
d. Develop of agricultural credit service in a timely manner for the poor, 
marginalized and small-scale producers through the formal banking system 
+ Expand formal agricultural credit to the poor, marginalized and small- 
scale producers in timely manner 
« Review the definition of farmer to include farmers so far excluded (c.g. 
those rearing livestock, honey bees, cultivating mushrooms ctc.) so that 
they can avail credit from banks (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.6,1.2) 
2. Introduce "Krishok Credit Card" agent banking and mabile financial 
services for the agricultural sector (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Area of 
Intervention 1.6.1.2) 
+ Provide bank account and "Krishok Credit Cards" to all farmers with 
special emphasis on women (NAP PoA 2020 1.6.1.2 and 2.4.4.) 
+ Introduce and expand agent-banking and Mobile Financial Service where 
the formal Bank branch are not reaching out 
 
3. Reduce interest rate of microcredit services and increase grace period of 
loan repayment with commodity specific calendar 
+ Increase average loan size of the MFIs for agricultural credit 
+ Adapt repayment timing to crop calendar 
+ Increase grace periods for the loan repayment 
+ Maintain the lower interest rate sct by the Central Bank 
ST) MT 
 
 4. Institutional reform in the service provision 
* Develop pro-poor credit disbursement modalities for agricultural, its value 
chain sector, 
+ Provide credit for poor and vulnerable peaple in adverse climatic situations 
« Strengthen all Krishi Banks, BRDB, PDBF for providing agricultural and 
rural credit 
 MT 
* Adequate credit 
supply to mect 
emerging demand 
*50% of Krishok 
Credit Card 
distributed 
by 2022 and rest 
by 2025 (as per 
NAP PoA 2020 
1.6.1.2) 
* Increase in 
average MFI 
loan size 
 
+n, of formal banks 
providing direct 
agricultural credit 
services 
+ Proportion of loans 
for marginalized 
farmers 
+n. of "Krishok 
Credit card" 
provided 
 
* Bangladesh 
Bank report 
+ Krishi Bank 
reports 
» BBS Reports. 
* MoA reports 
 
» MoA- DAE 
» MoP- BBS 
«Mo 
* Bangladesh Bank 
» PKSF 
* BRDB 
*» PDBF 
« Krishi Banks 
« MFIs and Non- 
Bank Financial 
Institutions 
 
es 127 1 |

Aren of Activities Time 'Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification and stakeholders 
1.1.5. Improve | 7. Develop and disseminate knowledge-intensive technologies and practices + Improved « Fertiliser efficiency | «MoA reports | * MoA- DAE, SCA 
input use # Increase overall agricultural R&D expenditure (as per Aol 1.2.3.) ST-MT fertiliser * Soil fertitity ¢ MoFood- FPMU 
'efficiency for * Increase investments in crop and natural resources management research (in efficiency and | ¢ Annual change in *MoL- DLRS 
PROS actHey line with NAP PoA 2020 Programme 3.2.1) soil fertility improved rice, *BARC and other 
Co eiarany * Develop farmers' capacity to process location-specific information and $ Oe wheat and maize NARS institutes 
oT health spa | ust their management practices to suit the conditions dependenceon | seeds production * AUs 
= ® Refine and expund currently available technology such as soil test-based | import of quality | (CIP2) * KGF 
environmental application of fertilisers, use of organic fertilisers, IPM, alternate wetting | ST- LT seeds: from * Private sector 
protection and drying method of irrigation, online advisory systems (in line with the Aversnns by 2025 « DPs 
NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.2.1. and 1.2.2), (as per NAP PoA » NGOs, INGOs 
* Encourage use of bio-fertilisers and bio-pesticides (in line with the NAP 2020 AOI 1.1,3) PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.1.1). e Savings op * Promote "high-tech" systems such as nano-technologies, mobile software- fertiliser, water 
based monitoring and field-embedded monitoring sensors & cnergy (as per 
© Develop quality seeds (as per NAP PoA 2020 Key Aol 1.1.3) and train NAP PoA 2020) farmers on how to produce and store quality seeds 
* Strengthen capacities of BRRI and BINA for producing seeds 
* Promote the production of quality seeds of selected regional and ethnic 
foods (see Aol 12.1). 
* Develop improved knowledge-intensive management technologies suited to MT- LT 
various crops and agro-ccological zones 
2. Carry out policy reforms to incentivise clean, efficient and sustainable 
technologies and practices at scale 
* Review fertiliser subsidy 
* Review cost structure of irrigation water (in line with the NAP PoA 2020 | ST- MT 
Key Aol 1.2.2) and regulatory frameworks to adjust pricing water and 
electricity pricing policies (in line with the Banglidesh National 
Conservation Strategy 2016) 
3. Improve access to land and water bodies and ensure their efficient use 
« Continue digital land zoning and efforts to establish land nghts especially ST-LT 
for the most vulnerable groups, with a special focus on women 
* Include availability of land for salt production 
* Ensure access to jheels, common waterbodies and land and uddress social 
equity issues 
1.1.6. Promate | 4. Carry out R&D (cross-cutting with 1.1.1.) ; Increase in feed | en. of feed producers | « MoFL *MoFL-DLS, the production | * Develop supplementation strategies to complement nutritional content of | ST. MT production registered by the reports DoF, BFRI, 
of quality feed feed + Adequate supply | MaFL BLRI and fodder « Improve techniques used by smallholders to make their own feed to respond to 
as 123 5 |

« Inspect of farms/feed mills/hatcheries to enforce of livestock feed law 
* Develop and disseminate storage for feed and fodder 
* Build infrastructure/ strengthen capacities to deyelop quality feed & fodder 
 
Area of Activities Time Targets Indicutors Means of a Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification and stakeholders 
through eInvestigate the possibility and cconomic feasibility of using non- seasonal changes | « Creation of an * MoA-DAE, 
appropriate conventional feed resources - see Aol §.2.1 in demand inventory of BARC 
support to feed | «Develop high yielding and resistant maize and soybean vuricties for feed existing feeding * MoP- BBS 
and fodder ¢ Develop fodder conservation practices, particularly hay and silage to cnable | )qT- LT systems across the * Molnd- BSTI 
industries for a stable supply of feed throughout the year country and * MoFood- BFSA 
ee and * Continue to develop low-cost aquaculture feeding approaches throughout the year * Mok! oc 
2. Develop extension to introduce and expand use of new and alternative 3 Te aataes of 
approaches - | - ; foed importers * Expand cultivation of HYV fodder training/ preservation techniques and | gy ygy e Chamber of 
hoor : ; : commerce for feed « Enhance forage production through means such as the integration of forage 'industries 
with crop cultivation, tree plantation, use of embankments, roadsides, ote. » Private eiotes 
¢ Encourage the use of aquatic plants especially water hyacinth as animal involved in the 
feed : ; sale of feed 
* Promote floating aqusponics for fodder production in Aaor and char arcas » DPs 
* Increase area under maize cultivation, espevially quality protein maize * NGOs, INGOs 
«Maximise the use of available feed resources (agricultural and agro- 
industrial by-products, natural pastures and browse) ST- LT 
«Complement with appropriate supplementation of poor-quality pasture 
3. Manage the feed and fodder sector 
e Carry out feed inventory across the year and regions 
« Continue registering feed producers and sellers ST-MT 
¢ Organise dialogues between public and private sectar involved in the feed 
and fodder industry | 
« Carry out bilateral import negotistions for feed and feed inputs 
« Establish a fodder and feed bank and fodder seedbank/germplasm at district 
level 
« Synchronize production/noeds of animals and production of feed & fodder 
« Create a single regulatory agency to coordinate all actors involved 
« Promote collaboration between stakeholders e.g_,livestock departments and 
municipalities which collect waste,some of which may be used as cattle feed 
4. Ensure quality and safety 
« Increase testing on fish, livestock and poultry feed ST- LT 
 
as 129i)

Area of Activities Time Turgets Indicators Means of Ce 
5 Promote the development of the feed industry 
+ Enable financing for privite sector Involved in the 'fead sector ST-LT 
* Ensure stable electricsty and gas supply for the foo! industry 
* Identify opportunities for reducing taxation of raw thaterials for teed 
* Consider antioligopoly regulations MT LT 
* Identify eviotving needs of the avctor dhrough 4 ropular review 
1. Support # coorstinated policy rucess towards the Blwe - iy aaialaae Biskani ae Muscat planning: p "Mica * Share of sectoral. | * BBS Ocean | * MoFL 
oconemy by * Dovelop common approach and expjalt synergies (costysharing of common See iy contribaben Lo Acoust "tor BRS, ae 
'promoting tbe infrastractare, crass-fertiliration of technofogy and innovation} ST LT produced aud Seep ORY Se -1 omy sectors Plunning suptuinable *Seck active parioipation of stakeholders' uporalimmalised (creation sf'an ( ; 
development of Reittforce role af Bive Reanomy Cell of the MoFEMIR "Cicean Account") opaaveen oes 
acca 2, Extimate the potential contrithutlon of the Blue Ecunamy Economy Cell 
te cacrdleiitien: * BBS to creatu'an "Goren account", * Mot! 
with other nep- | * Transform thie account into a Rite Reenomy account at a laler stage MI-LT * Mimistry of 
ae oe 3, Anvess sticks and develop national fishery management plans ST-LT Mercantile va : . 
Sn bad || PEARY RREORIEY ANATECRE TIT OR ee 
* Stengtben fishery policica, regulatury frameworks und inetitutional ST-LT Atthorisy and 
* Conduct uwareness-raising programmes *MoFA 
5. Develop a Monitor Contro} cal Surveillance system and reduce legal \ 374 7 * MoPL- DoF 
Unregulated and Unreported (UU) fishing * MoHA- Coaat 
6. Improve infrastrecture and production practices Guard 
* Improve infrastrasture for esptare amd culties Fisheries eee 
+ Develop value chains and food safety STAT eee Boost coaxta) aquacultare productivity * Fishers' anié bon 
7, Sustain community empowerment and livelthoods ST-LT owners: 
* Carry out adaptive research, training aid extension activitiey asteciations 
*Suppert faking community msfitations and alternative tivelihouds 
development 
* Business development and market linkayes for alternative livelihoods, with 
a focus on young women and mer, 
HB Develep | 7, Formulate and implement un Outhrenk Investigation and Response oPuactional nee | ee | eee = ' ' * oo 
oe ica Strategy Plan and Syenderd Operating Procedures (in line with Output 2,2. Seas . wesbgation and comtagnans Maa . Gisessce 
BE

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification and stakcholders 
responsible under Outcome 2 and Component 2 of the One Health Strategic Framewark | ST and Response committees in cach | » Sector-wise * MoEFCC 
practices for and Action Plan) Strategy Plan division, and national * MaFood 
animal health = | * Conduct joint risk analysis and develop a joint action plan that links the and Standard districts budget * NGOs, INGOs 
along the plan to the National Disaster Management Plan Operating + Public budgetary * DPs 
principles of * Make budgetary allocations for coordinated outbreak response Procedures allocation every 
"One Health" | «Ensure coordination for outbreak preparedness and response, especially at st-ut | ° One Health" year for conducting the operational level ' communication risk and outbreak 
* Enhance investigation and response collaborations between human and strategy in place | analysis 
animal health sectors, environmental sector across the on. of doses of 
2. Develop a communication strategy for "One Health" : Site Ce naan 
* Develop a strategy with specific focus on zoonotic discascs vaccine supply 
* Establish processes to enable individuals and communities to develop the ST-MT chain 
knowledge, attitudes and skills for protecting their health, livelihoods and 
ecosystems apuinst diseases 
3. Develop a standard supply chain for vaccines with robust inventory 
management 
* Build standard supply chain for vaccines using international standards and | oy. yer 
strict enforcement 
«Build adequate infrastructure and capacities to prevent counterfeiting, 
tampering, contamination and theft, and ensure quality 
* Consider possibility of having community-based animal health workers (as 
suggested in the CSAIP) 
«Develop tmck and trace system to improve planning and inventory 
management and minimise waste 
1.1.9, I. Ease the registration process *Effective und = |en.of agriculture- |*Department |*MoLGR&C- Strengthen the | * Develop easy and fast registration process of the PO and cooperatives more diverse related government | of RDCD, DoC 
role of » Develop a digital registration process ST producers" sponsored Cooperatives |*«MoA-DAE BARC 
producers' 2. Increase financial services organization and =| cooperative Reports * MoFL- DLS, DoF, 
orgenizations eIncrease the number of crodit snd insurance services for PO and cooperatives for | societies BLRI, BFRI and cooperatives agricultural en. of agriculture- * MoP- BBS, BSTI 
caper etren ae: | Eusy and low interest access to financial services production, Telated self- * MoFood- BFSA reducing the oats ae ST value addition, initiated * Increase financial literacy training * MoF cost of and market cooperative *MolC 
production, 4. Training and capacity building development socictics « SME Foundation 
improving «Carry out training and capacity development program for improving 
market nccess, organization's internal structure, better management, and information flow ST 
= ervores « Improve capacity to negoniate and develop proposals 
raconvea by 5. Provide diversified support «Integration of * Private sector 
producers * Increase and adapt support to rural POs and cooperatives POmd * NGOs, INGOs 
* Establish market connection and economic opportunities for PO and | ST cooperatives in *DPs cooperatives the R&D process 
 
ee 131 5 |

Activities 
. nsitive divers! fication of f Bee 1 productior 
Time Targets Indicators (input 
and output 
Means of 
verification 
Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
 
 
hg Ae ee SS 8: se sey ee UUUt! eas 
| ds Develop and disseminate improved erodaction technologies for non- 
 
 
 
 
 
. Agricultural * MoA- DAE, 
 
 
Increase in * Production of 
diversification | cereals crops and animal source food (see Aol 1.1.1.) production of selected Census BARC, BARI, 
into e Exploit complementarity among production activities «.g., grow leguminous | ST- MT horticulture, horticulture, Reports BINA 
horticulture, eatch crop that takes advantage of residual soi) moisture and nitrogen after fisheries, fisheries, «BBS « MoFL, BLRI, 
oe rice harvest; use poultry manure to supplement fertilisers. livestock, poultry i tia poultry BFRI 
estock, and products and dairy products ~ 
poultry and 2, Reduce risk through promotion of contract farming (sec Aol 2.1.1 » ST-MT | on (Cis eee a 
dairy products | * Design regulations to ensure transparency, faimess, and enforceability of consumption of | * Production of * CIMMYT 
with high such contracts nutrient -dense selected ethnic and ICRIS AT : 
nutrient and 3. Invest in marketing, storage, and processing infrastructures for regional and ethnic | regional foods . © Private sector 
micronutrient facilitating rapid access to markets while minimizing the losses in transit foods in major Crops * NGOs, INGOs 
content (see Aol 2.1.1.) sein production » DPs 
mnelading * Cteate public goods such as flrm-to-market road, establishing and regional and regulating local market yards, and promoting private sector investments 
ethnic foods. through public-private partnerships, credit support and regulatory support 
4. Establish agricultural marketing information systems (sce Aol 2.2.5.) ST-MT 
« Ensure the existence of efficient agricultural marketing information system 
* Favour ICT-based approaches 
5. Promote the cultivation of regional and ethnic foods (in line with NPAN2 ST 
6.2.1 and following NAP PoA 2020 Program 1.4) 
* Identify regional and cthnic foods that are particularly nutrientdense 
* Promote the production of the above through FBDG 
* Document nutrient composition of such foods in FCTs ST- MT 
« Collect and conserve germplasm of prioritized foods 
» Exploit genetic divorsity m breeding programmes for developing HY Vs with 
tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses 
MT- LT

1.2.2. Increase 
funding and 
improve 
R&D for 
sustuinnble 
agriculture 
I, Boost budget allocation for public sector R&D (in line with NAP PoA 2020 
Programme 3.1) 
* Boost in budget allocation for the public-sector R&D 
« Direct funding to priority areas 
* Develop capacities to carry out research with special emphasis on advanced 
and novel fields notably in academia 
* Carry out policy reforms to incentivise private sector investments, especially 
in proprietary technologies such as the development of hybrid varieties of 
Hutrient-dense vegetables and fruits 
ST- LT 
MT- LT 
 
2. Promote R&D funding for non-staple nutrient-dense agricultural 
products 
* Redress imbalance in the allocation of research fimding to staple cereals vis- 
d-vis nutrient dense agricultural products 
« Promote nutrient-sensitive diversification by increasing the R&D support for 
developing improved technologies for the production of nutrient-dense foods 
« Increase support to regional research centres in hills, char, Barind, Aaor and 
coastal areas 
ST- LT 
 
3, Carry out institutional reforms in the NARS 
© Accelerate institutional reforms to increase efficiency und effectiveness 
« Strengthen human resource development by (a) sponsoring more researchers 
for advanced degrees; (b) focusing the training programs in new high potential 
areas such as biotechnology, geoyraphic information systems, nano- 
technology and ICT; and (c) building # stronger linkage between research 
institutes and agricultural universities 
* Contmue research capacity strengthening efforts of the National Agricultural 
Technology Project (NATP) (see Aol 5.5.3). 
ST- MT 
ST- LT 
# 20% increase in 
agriculture R&D 
budget per year for 
the next five years 
(as per NAP PoA 
2020 Programme 
3.1) 
* Increased funding 
to agricultural 
regional research 
centres in hills, 
char, Barind, 
haor and coastal 
areas 
« Budget 
allocations for 
public sector 
R&Dm 
agriculture 
* Funding to 
agricultural 
regional research 
centres in hills, 
char, Barind, 
haor and coastal 
areas 
=» MoA 
Reports 
© MoF budget 
* Annual 
Report of 
NARS 
institutes 
* MoA 
* MoP 
« BARC and other 
NARS instirutes 
 
1,2,3, Improve 
the availability 
of safe 
nutritious food 
through 
innovation and 
expansion of 
appropriate 
methods of 
urban-based 
food 
production 
 1, Expand rooftop gardening 
¢ Provide incentives to households or businesses (e.g. tax incentives) 
« Set up demonstrations in cities on roof gardening (see NAP PoA 2020 Aol 
1.4.1.) and microgardens 
ST- MT 
 
2. Develop vertical farming 
« Carry cut R&D so that a prester array of fruits and vegetables can be grown 
through vertical farming 
* Promote extension services for vertical farming 
ST- LT 
«Increased urban 
agricultural 
production 
en. of households 
trained in rooftop 
gardening 
*MoA 
relevant 
reports 
* MoA- DAE 
* BARI and other 
NARS institutes 
« Agricultural 
Universities 
* Private sector 
 
« Facilitate funding to those wanting to invest in vertical farming 
* Research to bring down the costs of setting up and running vertical farming 
3. Promote hydroponics and aquaponics 
Train stakeholders to use hydroponics in a safe and sustainable way 
* Providing knowledge resources, guidance and trainmg 
ST- LT 
 
 4. Boost RAD for urban and peri-urban agriculture 
*Promote cooperation between government agencies, non-state research 
institutes and the private sector with adequate incentives 
« Promote R&D to develop new techniques for urban/peri-urban agriculture ST- LT 
 * NGOs, INGOs 
* DPs 
 
es 133 i /

establishment, 
improvement 
and 
management of 
post-harvest 
marketing 
infrastructure 
and processing 
facilities for 
horticultural 
products, pulses 
and legumes, 
livestock and 
fisheries 
es 134 | 
 
 
 
 
* There is scamloss % of upazila and 
infrastructire at both national and local level flow in goods traffic union road network 
« Boost connectivity between different transport modalities and transport in good condition 
« Strengthen arterial transport corridors, and bypass and connecting | LT facilities (us per (as per CIP2 MR) 
roads PP2041) en. of growth centres, 
* Place greater emphasis on inland water transport and railways (as « There are enough rural markets, per PP2041) facilitics to meet the women market 
« Carry out major programme of milway upgrading and intermodal demand for cold centres, and Union transport connectivity storage and other Parishad Complexes 
facilities required to developed by LGED 
2. Facilitate the establishment, improvement, management and transport perishabtes and DAM (as per 
maintenance of cold storage and transportation facilities for CIP2 MR) 
perishable nutrient rich foods 
Stimulate cold storage development in 4 coordinated way through MT 
PPPs especially through supermarket retailers 
* Ensure innovation and compliance to food safety standards 
*Use PPPs for the establishment and maintenance of regional 
market hubs, cold storages, warchouses, modern growth centres, 
union parishad complexes and cold chain transportation facilitics 
(including through railway cool chains) 
. da in the establishm of on-farm 3. Invest ent of on-farm processing uae infrastructure, including on-farm, and storage facilities (see Aol 
5,21 and 5.2.2) 
 
* LGED 
publications 
* DAE, BBS 
Statistical 
Yearbook 
* LGED, DAM 
 
I; Support the expansion ciE uebtienanee ef taxperieiin i = 
Information and 
Advice Centers 
(FIACs) 
* MoPL 
* MoP- BBS 
* MoFood- FPMU 
* Local authoritics 
*BAU 
*DPs 
* NGOs, INGOs 
¢ Private sector

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities 
frame 
Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
2.1.2, Set up 
financial 
intermediation 
services with 
improved 
access to credit 
for rural 
markets along 
with other 
complementary 
services 
 
1. Adapt financial services to the needs of post-harvest food value 
chains 
* Convert the SME Foundation into SBA , 4 one-stop 
platform to promote access to institutional credit 
* Develop novel payment systems such as digitized payment 
¢ Consider all commercial Joans regardless of their value to inclnde 
even the smallest entrepreneurs 
* Expand innovative tools like warchouse receipt financing for 
post-harvest financing 
* Move beyond current property-based collateral system 
« Expand the legal and reguistory structure of the mobile-payments 
system 
«Improve the insolvency and debt resolution solution for MSMEs 
¢.g. provide dedicated lines of credit to marketing-processing 
cooperatives and associations (Aol 2.2.1), 
« Improve the credit market through a range of measures including: 
credit bureaus, credit guarantee schemes, and a range FinTech 
Mmitiatives in order to improve credit market Information, reduce 
compliance and information costs and lower credit risk with 
particular focus on the poor (as per the PP2041) 
ST 
MT- LT 
 
 
2. Expand financial services to develop post-harvest activities, with 
a particular focus on rural areas and women 
« Expand access to financing -both bank and non-bank- to those 
traditionally excluded especially in rural areas, and women in 
particular in the spirit of "leaving no one behindTM 
« Establish growth centres in cach upazilas in order to, e.g, 
facilitate credit (in lme with NAP PoA 2020 1.6.1) 
« Target E-commerce platforms, digital marketplaces and 
individual sellers beyond Dhaka and other urban areas 
» Extend finance to MSMEs for improving their practices (c.g.,by 
adopting GAP, GMP, GHP, HACCP, ISO certification, etc.) and 
acquiring post-harvest technologies 
« Explore innovative approaches 
* Encourage MSMEs to link up with cach other (Ao! 2.2.1) and 
create groups and associations (Aol 2.2.4) to facilitate their 
financial inclusion. 
 ST- MT 
LT 
 
* Access to credit for 
post harvest 
activities ensured 
for all types of FVC 
actors including 
women and MSEs 
* Increased insurance 
services for MSMEs 
and other risk 
financing 
 
« Credit disbursement 
to FVC MSMEs 
* Existence of an 
operational SBA 
 
* Bangladesh 
Bank reports 
 
« MoA-DAE, 
DAM, BADC 
* MoFL 
« MoP- BBS, 
BFSA 
«PKSF 
* Bangladesh Bank 
« MFIs and Non- 
Bank 
« Financial 
Institutions 
 
es 135 i)

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities 
frame 
Targets Means of 
verification 
Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
3, Develop insurance services for MSMEs and other risk financing 
* Expand investment in msurance services with clicntelo friendly 
premium services for the MSMEs in the agro-FVC 
« invigorate and extend coverage of existing MFIs" microinsurance 
* Launch other types of risk financing mechanisms such as credit 
guarantee schemes and crowdfunding platform to create 
opportunities for equity financing for microenterprises 
* Develop other risk financing mechanisms 
ST 
ST- MT 
 
 
2.1.3. Maintain 
an orderly 
market 
management by 
securing 
property rights, 
regulating 
competition and 
stabilizing 
prices 
1. Carry out an Ecosystem Competition Analysis (in line with the 
PP2041) 
* Measure the competition intensity and product differentiation 
* Assess the need and opportunity to grant property nght 
protection 
* Analyse sectoral entry barriers by their category; legal 
(patents/licenses), technical (high start-up, transaction costs, 
investment costs; monopoly; technical knowledge); strategic 
(predatory pricing/ first mover/incurmbent positioning); brand 
loyalty 
LT 
« Sector specific 
guidelines in place 
* Operational 
Bangladesh 
Compctition 
Commission and 
NIIPRP for the food 
industry 
 
2. Fully operationalise Bangladesh Competition Commission (in 
line with the PP2041) 
¢ Establish sector-specific guidelines to ensure competition and 
adequate regulatory mechanisms are implemented 
¢ Equip Competition Commission with adequate human and 
LT 
 
3. Operationalise the NHIPRP in particular for the food industry 
(in line with the PP2041 and the NITPRP, 2018) 
* Develop a Roadmap to ensure policy implementation, monitaring 
and adequate financing 
® Promote collaboration between NCIP and MoC, Agriculture and 
Bangladesh Competition Commission fo ensure Innovation and 
technological adoption within the food industry 
* Make NCIP responsible for facilitating Policy coherence 
between the NIJPRP and the relevant national and sectoral 
development policies 
ST 
ST- MT 
LT 
* Competition 
intensity index 
* Product 
differentiation index 
* Yearly 
monitoring 
« MoC- 
Bangladesh 
Competition 
Commission 
* Molnd- NCIP 
*MoPA 
* Private sector 
 
 2.1.4. Ensure 
trade 
liberalisation 1. Sustain transparency in trade facilitation 
© Improve timely availability of import-export related information 
available in the Bangladesh trade portal MT- LT trade facilitation 
 * More transparency in |* Total regional (Asia) 
food trade 
* MoF yearly 
budget 
documents « MoC- FTA Wing 
MoF 
 
ee 1367 |

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
 
and facilitation 
to support the 
supply of 
quality food at 
all times 
* Expedite consultations among stakcholders on new draft 
regulations 
© Inform traders on new regulations before these become effective 
e Ensure advanced ruling on tmde classification 
2. Strengthen institutional arrangement and cooperation at national, 
level 
* Ensure necessary support to FTA wing and BTTC from the 
national agencies involved at various levels with food trade 
* Form/strengthen « unit to facilitate and monitor FTA for cereals, 
cash crops and agricultural mputs 
J. Enable paperless trade 
4. Support budget and capacity development of relevant institutions 
5, Stabilise food trade partnership with key food exporting 
countries through foreign trade agreements especially within 
SAARC region 
« MoC and DAM to continue monitoring food price and trade 
volumes (see Strategy 3.3) 
* Sign long-term agreements with key food trade partners, 
leveraging on regional associations (e.g. SAARC) 
LT 
 
6. Operationalise the SAARC Food Bank (SFB) 
® Renew political commitment and support policy amendments 
© Revise pricing strategy, institutional and distribution mechanisms 
« Ensure additional provision to SBF to enhance regional trade 
LT 
 
 7, Optimise export support policy 
* Monitor ongoing supportive measures to the export sectors and 
adjust based on sub-sectors' needs 
* Review competitiveness and performance of export-oriented food 
sectors and ensure adequacy of the policy instruments in place 
* Monitor import substitution practices as appropriate 
LT 
 
* Stable food trade 
partnerships in piace: 
« Operational SFB 
 
* Share of regianal 
(Asia) food trade in 
tolal trade 
* Value of food and 
beverage exports 
(CIP2 indicator) 
 
* MoC/ BBS/ 
MoA statistics 
 
* MoFood- FPMU 
* MoA- DAM 
« DPs 
* SAARC 
© Private sector 
 
es 1371)

Area of Intervention Activities 'Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
2.2.1. Stimulate I, Promote innovation for digital invoice and value chain ¢ More efficient FVCs |e n, of registered valuc |e Reports of * MoA- DAM, 
innovation-led inventory management ST-LT chain actors responsible DAE, BADC 
efficiency gains in food |* Promote innovative technological platform hosting digital le n, and types of ministries and «|e MoP, BBS 
value chains by invoice, order maintenance contract farming other agencies le MoFood, 
shortening the chain, |. promote government prescribed Electronic Cash Register and © Cold storage capacity |« DAM reports BFSA improving eid te Point of Sale - for VAT automation process (see 5.2.2) * DAErcports |» PKSF 
Sua wuinté » Increase contract farming and to reduce number of FVCs Bank Financial 
actors ST-LT Institutions 
® Increase the registration of value chain actors for traceability (@ Private sector 
* Prioritize the set-up of formal distribution channels through ° DPs 
the increased enforcement of food safety standards along ° NGOs, 
with the consumer awareness and sensitization campaigns INGOs 
3, Strengthen the linkages among FVC agents and marketing 
groups (cross reference Aol 2.2.4) 
© Increase partnership among the marketing group, agents, ST-LT 
contract farming 
® Increase innovative solution with online platform for 
connecting the producers and the consumers 
4. Promote innovative solution for reducing food loss and waste 
(see Strategy 5,2) ST-LT 
s - innovative solution for packaging and storage (Aol 
2.3.1) 
* Promote smart packaging (c.g. plastic crates, paper bagving) 
for each fruits and. vegetables' 
« Increase research for packaging innovation from reduced 
contamination as well as environmental sustainability, 
« Enforce the food packaging and labelling guideline of BFSA 
2.2.2. Encourageand | + Regularly perform Enterprise Surveys (ESs) ¢ Growth in-number of le n. of MSMEs le Enterprise {» MoP- BBS support the establishment|" ©*pand the World Bank Enterprise Survey under the MSMEs.intheFVC | involved intheFVC | surveyBBS |e Molnd und growth of financially| leadership of BBS and the Moind to include a topic on St- MT reports MoBECC 
viable MSMEs environment and sustainability and use the CGAP [ 
 
a 138 ji |

Arca of Intervention Activities Time 
frame 
Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
Responsible 
actor and 
stakcholders 
enterprises' subgrouping and profiling by sub-sectors and by 
sub-region 
* Suggest dats-driven, tailored made solutions for MSMEs in 
Bangladesh 
2. Design tailored-made financial, technical and managerial 
support based on the enterprise profiling and surveys 
*ESs will help provide targeted support to different groups 
insluding peer to peor exchange among, different profiles of 
MSMEs 
* Leverage on the promotion of inclusive cooperative' group- 
based processing and marketing (Aol 2.2.4) 
* Tap into continued technical support from DPs and the GOF 
MT- LT 
 
3. Promote private sector investment in agro-food processing 
through large scale adoption of energy saving technology and 
equipment 
¢ Expand GFC Country Programme to include agro-processing 
in line with PP 204] 
* Design an mtegral package of concessional financing for agro- 
processing und technical assistance to create an enabling 
environment (Aol 2.2.3) with adequate technical assistance 
* Submit proposal to the the GCF for funding to be implemented 
under the coordination of Molnd and MOEFCC and support 
from MoA 
* Essential elements of the programme design will be capacity 
building, awareness raising, policy development and support in 
loan disbursal, as well as monitoring and evaluation of the 
programme target 
MT-LT 
* Percentage of credit 
provided to food 
MSMESs as percentage 
of total MSME credit 
* Bangindesh 
Bank Credit 
Information 
Bureau 
* Annual reports 
of Molnd, BB, 
World Bank, 
FAO 
* MoA 
« BB, Credit 
Information 
Bureau 
« World Bank 
and other DPs 
¢ Private sector 
 
 2.2.3. Create an 
enabling environment 
to attract private 
investment in 
infrastructure, 
processing, value 
addition, marketing 
and eliminate business 
barriers I. Establish a favourable policy and technical support to 
incentivise investment in food processing 
* Conduct regular enterprise surveys to ensure that policy 
makers' agenda adapts © MSMEs' evolving constraints 
e Tap into GCF to ensure that an integral package of 
concessional financing is provided to agro-processing (Aol 
2.2.2) 
* Enable strong PPPs for coordinated investments, technical 
support and enabling policies ST- LT 
 » Greater involvement 
and investment of the 
private sector in FVCs. 
*By 2030, ensure 
universal wocess to 
affordable, reliable and 
modern energy services 
(SDG target 7.1.): 
 en. of food processing 
units 
« National, urban and 
rural proportion of 
population with access 
to electricity (SDG 
7.41) 
*SDG Bangladesh 
Progress Report 
Tracking SDG 7 
(World Bank) 
 * Molnd 
« MoP -BBS 
¢ MoPEMR- 
SREDA, BPDB 
*DPs 
* Private sector 
 
as 1301 |

Area of intervention Activities 
frame 
Targets Indicators Means of 
verification actor and 
stakeholders 
* Strengthen und empower local governance (Aol $,5,2) to 
ensure the balance between private investment and socio- 
economic development in rural areas 
* Implement transparency and anti-corruption policics and 
actions 
2. Provide synergetic public goods such as infrastructure, data 
and information 
* Leverage FAO Hill (Aol 5.3.1) to ensure synergetic interaction 
and matchmaking between actors 
* Establish SEZ for agro-processing to [acilitate economy of 
scope and seule (Aol 2.3,3). 
ST-LT 
 
3. Ensure power generation capacity 
* Bangladesh Power Development Board (KBPDB) to address 
surge in power demand and adjust the energy mix for ensuring 
long-term energy security by strengthening the preparation of 
power system master plans 
* Exploit synergies with the GCF (Aol 2.2.2) 
ST- LT 
* 100% Proportion of 
population with 
access to electricity 
* 35% of population 
with primary reliance 
on clean fuels and 
technology 
 
2.2.4, Promote 
inclusive 
cooperative/group- 
based processing and 
marketing 
 
1, Enhance political commitment and local level institutional 
support in cooperative/ group-based food processing 
* Update National Cooperative Policy 2012 
«Local government to provide institutional local government 
(Aol 5.5.2), along with implementation of transparency and 
anti-corruption measures 
ST-LT 
 
2. Assess the comparative advantage af the cooperative system 
in Bangladesh 
* Assess and demonstrate comparative advantage of cooperatives 
compared to the private sector 
*Integrate processing and markcting cooperatives into the 
Enterprises Surveys (Aol 2.2.2) 
ST-LT 
 
3, Integrate cooperative-related sensitisation activities in 
community development projects 
ST-LT 
 
 4. Support financial inclusion of coaperatives/ groups-based 
processing, marketing and access digital services 
* Provide special attention, dedicated lines of credit, low-interest 
enterprise loans (Ao! 1.1.9) and financial managerial support 
{Aol 2.1.2) to cooperatives ST-LT 
* Increased numbers of 
cooperatives and 
groups in food 
processing and 
marketing 
*n.of cooperatives and 
groups involved in foo 
processing and 
marketing 
*% of tax exemption for 
food processing co- 
operatives 
* Reports of 
responsible 
ministries and 
other agencies 
* Bangladesh Bank 
reports 
 
* MoLGDRC- 
RDCD 
« MoP- BBS 
* MoFood 
« MoF 
*SME 
Foundation 
 
as 1405 |

Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
* Ensure their access to digital services through the * % of upazilas covered 
implementation of the National ICT Policy 2018 under VGD program 
providing 
2.2.5, Strengthen ICT- | 7, Strengthen DAM market price data monitoring system ie Widespread access to jen,of upazila level le DAM Annual |*MoA-DAM, DAE 
based market through expanded organizational structure up to upazila level market information by) DAM staff reports « MoP-BBS 
information system to | (as per Output 4.6, under Strategic Goal 4 SPARS) ST farmers across the - fe n. of beneficiaries agricultural wing 
provide real time « Carry out detailed assessment of necessary human and financial country through use of] reached * MoPA 
support to farmers. resources of DAM including st upazila level ICTs ¢ MoFood-FPMU, 
Allocations planned accordingly DG Food 
ST- MT « Private sector 
2. Improve data callection methodology with BBS support (as «DPs 
per Activity 4,6.2 SPARS) « INGOs; NGOs 
3. Make price data monitoring system available, reliable and | sT_ (AT 
 
 
effective 
«Develop a tool in coordination with existing and effective 
initistives in synergy with the private sector (e.g. 
Grameenphone GP Krishi Sheba, call centre information advice 
for farmers) and international development imitiatives (e.g. 
MMI support to virtual call centres) in support of fiirmers* 
 decision making and income opportunities 
a 141 5)

'Area of Intervention 
o)24i) ihe 
2.3.1, Preserve and 
promote food safety 
and autrients along 
the value chain 
including during 
transportation, 
processing, packaging, 
storage, wholesale and 
retail 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 eReview and ensure compliance with food certification 
guidelines harmonized with Codex standards and BSTI 
certification. 
efinsure technical teams periodically review certifications of 
products and estublishments 
e Provide appropriate nutrient labelling and product information 
in line with legal requirements and dietary recommendations 
Provide food producers' manutfiscturers a platform where they 
¢an consult for concerns and issues on certification & labelling 
Activities Time Targets Indicators Meansof | Responsible actor 
1. Coltect evidence on gaps and opportunities to preserve food «Evidence available on | «n, of research * FPMU * MoFood-FPMU 
safety and nutrients along the FVC and implement |ST-MT | gaps and opportunitics| projects under NARS | monitoring \* Molnd-BSTI 
recommendations to preserve food safoty on nutrient eBSTI reports je MoHFW 
2. Sensitise stakeholders of the value chain to food safety and oa cage eat tenntlis edi *MoA- DAE nutrition (in line with NPAN 6.2.5 and 6.5.8) tsti Sectignd! eae 
Bie name orton ss eases and solids Be food) ST-MT_ | implemented certified by BSTI + MoHFW- BFSA 
# Create incentives and flag those that exist (¢,2. opening up of je BCSIR 
export markets when complying to safety standards) See 
« Sensitise consumers to these isswes (see Aol 3.2.2 and 5.1.3) bar lited Food 
J. Establish and ensure efficient food storage facilities Laboratories 
*Establish and ensure efficient and sufficient food storage * B-SAFE 
facilities, including cold storage (see Aol 2.1.1. and $.2.1). ST-LT Foundation 
* Audit commercia) and public storage facilities to follow BFSA « BFSN 
standards (including PFDS storage - see Aol 4.1.1). *CAB 
@ Take actions against defaulters « Private sector 
¢ Promote adequate storaye ut all stages of Value chain: in farms, « DPs. 
processors, wholesalers, and retailers, and even consumers (see * NGOs, INGOs 
Aol 3.2.1, and 5,1,3) 
4. Encourage safe food outlets selling certified food 
» Create awareness ST- MT 
* Provide incentives to retailers 
5. Strengthen food product certification and nutrition labelling 
for assuring quality and safety STeMT 
 
as 142i)

Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of -_| Responsible actor 
frame verification | and stakeholders 
©90% of households |» Domestic production |» National je MoHFW- IPHN, 
2.3.2; Promote the 1, Collect data to inform policy consuming Vitamin A-| of VitA fortified Micronutrient | BNNC 
fortification and ¢ Review all fortification endesvours == |FSE fortified edible oil by| edible oi! as Survey MoFood- [PHN, 
nutrition enhancement | °C®Y out a National Micronutrient Study and a specific 2028 (as pet NSPCMD) | proportion of total |*NPAN2 MoWCA of relevant foods National lodine Deficiency Disorders Survey disaggregating by ° 50% of apuzilas edible oil production | monitoring Mold -BSTI. 
where desirable and regions and socio-economic groups covered under VGD | * n. of nutritionally BSCIC 
efficient eRegularly assess the distribution of key micronutrient ST-LT | programto provide | fortified foods in the MoC deficiencies across regions and population groups nutritionally enriched | market MoA 
fortified food by 2025 MOoST, IFST 2. Monitor existing endeavours and apply existing rules (as per NPAN2) Control of lodine 
«Check quality of fortified foods ST Deficiency 
* Adjust and expand current initiatives to adapt to the needs 
(as identified above) 
« Reinforce compliance of the private sector to existing laws and 
notably on vitamin A fortification (see Strategic Area 6 of the 
NSPCMD), 
¢ Strengthen the capacity of relevant institutes (as advocated by MT-LT 
 NSPCMD) 
Introduce quality control laborstorics to check fortification 
standards, quality and levels and in particular in all salt 
industries to check the suitability of salt iodisation 
 
as 1431 |

# Consider expanding the range of fortified foods 
# Develop techniques to improve the bioavailability of nutrients 
such as the germination and malting of grains and pulse for 
example, and ways 10 enrich foods. 
e Research the possibility of addition or inclusion of foods to 
existing ones (c.g., in complementary foods) to enhance 
nutritional value of foods using local products 
fortified. food during 
and tmmcdiately afler 
emergency by 2025 (as 
per NPAN2) 
 
4. Promote the sale and use of fortified foods and advocate for 
their use 
© Encourage retail sector to sell fortified products at affordable 
prices 
¢ Promote their consumption by sll segments of the population 
though marketing campaigns (a5 promoted by Strategic Area 5 
of the NSPCMD and in line with Strategic Objective 4 of the 
National PoA for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030), 
@ Integrate fortified foods with other health programmes to create 
greater demand 
ST- LT 
 
5. Prevent loss of nutrients while processing foods. 
¢ Identify where loss of nutrients happens in the value chain (see 
Aol 2.2.1 and §.2.2). 
¢ Take measures to prevent loss of nutnents in the processing of 
foods e.g.,milling of grains, parboiling of nice flakes 
ST- LT 
 
 6. Adjust, expand and scale up existing programmes 
expand outreach,coverage and access to fortified foods (e.g, 
iodised salt, Vit A oil fortification) by targeted populations ST- LT 
 
people receiving 
nutritionally enriched 
fortified food during 
snd immediately after 
emergency 
 
Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
frame verification | and stakeholders 
3. Devise and deploy new programmes to respond to the needs 290% of vulnerable nutritionally enriched Disorders (CIDD) 
identified (Strategic Ares 2 of the NSPCMD) MT-LT | people ta receive fortified food Project 
# Use experience from other countries nutritionally enriched |¢% of vulnerable * NGOs, INGOs 
© Private sector 
®DPs 
 
es 144 9 /

Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
frame verification | and stakeholders 
based on monitoring (see above) - in line with NPAN2 Sirstegie 
Action 6.2.8 and Strategic Objective 4 of the National PoA for 
Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030) 
# Explore the scope for double fortification of edible oi] with 
vilamin A and vitamin D Engure to reach groups with specific 
needs and/or deficiencics in particular nutrients 
«Introduce more fortified foods into food basket of safety net 
programs (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.7) and 
bring to scale (see Aol 4.3,3) 
2.3.3: Promote 1. Strengthen linkages with local economies * Agricultural produce |* Territorial *BEZA reports |¢PMO, BEZA, 
innovation and * Consider environmental and socio-economic factors and local | ST-LT | EZs developed competitiveness * Molnd reports PPPA 
development of consensus in appraisal of business plans submitted by throughout the countty | indices (agricultural eFPMU 
appropriate PrnpOnene specialization, * Molnd 
technologies to 2. Identify areas, roles and gaps to develop agricultural produce infrastructure, human * MoA-BIRTAN, 
preserve nutritional § | p79 : capital) BARC 
value in local and eldentify areas for agro-processing of nutritious | MT-1T nar see °MoC export processin se horti ; tal hi : produce EZs * Local government} Se (EPZs 'i g crops/horticulture with a potentiul high socio-economic and scales 
employment impact 
SE a ece * Analyse territorial competitiveness of selected areas : Se 
(PPP) P » Assess gaps and investment needs y 
* Match investment needs with respective areas eS ADB HCA 
3, Promote learning from international experience, best ST-LT and other DPs 
practice and standards . « NGOs and INGOs 
* Review the best practice experience and standards 
Organize symposium for institutions such as BEZA to 
exchange experience 
* Incorporate improvements into the practice 
; * Increased food testing | n. of private and *BFSArcports |e Molnd- BSTI 
ae sear les vivate | £Accelerate GAP, GAgP, GHP, GMP training and knowledge | St-LT | by private sector and| pubtic foodttesting |» MoC reports _ |» MoFood- FPMU 
sector to test food and transfer (see Aol 5.1.2., Action 6) communication of laboratories listed * MoST-BCSIR. 
communicate results | 2 Prepare strategy, guidelines, and Standard Operating results to consumers under BFSA it IFST 
to and engage with Procedures for the private sector (see Aal 5,),2., Action 2) ST- MT national and * MoLGRD&C 
value chain actors for subnational level * MoA-DAB, adequate remedial 3. Build capacities of private sector to test, trace, recall foods «n.of food testing BARC 
actions, and establish | #4 communicate with the public aceredited labs ¢ Private sector food traceability » Strengthen capacities of all private sector actors along the value | sT. LT 
mechanisms chain-so that they understand the importance of and are able to 
ee 14510

Area of Intervention Activities Indicators Means of 
verification 
Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
 
 
enguge in activitics relating to testing food safety and recall 
management 
« Establish traceability mechanisms (as detailed in Aol 5.1.2) 
* Train private sector to communicate with the public to advertise 
adherence to food safety standards bul also in cases of 
breakdowns in food safety 
 4. Promote the establishment of food texting laboratories 
« Promote establishment of private laboratories 
«Decide on Jocation taking into account location of agro- 
processing hotspots; risk assesaments and a cost benefit 
anal ysis « Use PPP modalities to meet the needs of the country and set up 
a network of laboratorics 
ST-LT 
 5. Promote private sector based accredited independent 
certification and inspection agencies for both large and 
MSMES and issue trade licenses 
ST-LT 
 6. Strengthen consumer forums and build consumer awareness 
(see Aol 5.1.3) 
 ST- LT 
 
® Trade licenses issucd 
to SMEs on the food 
supply chain 
 
 = DPs 
» NGOS, INGOs 
* SME Foundation 
» PKSF 
* BFSN, BAB 
 
a 1465)

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification | and stakeholders 
tabs oh 
2.4.1. Expand 1. Increase market demand-based vocational training on the FVC * Increased employment in|» Coverage of TVET |« Reports of ls Molnd 
and promote for rural youth, women, and disubled persons agriculture-driven, off- training in FVC agencies involved je MoA- DAE, BARC 
agriculture- * Increase market demand based TVET training on FVC ST- MT} farm employment and | especially to rural inFVCTVET |e MoF I. 
driven, off-farm | « Introduce location specific TVET traiming for the rural youth, other employment along} youths, women, and |« MoA reports * MoE- DTE, BTEB 
smEteymess and | women, and disabled groups ee pps ose disable person *MoYS- DYD 
youth, women, on. i i 
soment | 2Cyl ning fr ome ei nee ec aemest along the food Support women entrepreneurs with credit facilities, extension 
value chain by services. [CT services, and the market integration in addition to the Manpower 
expanding capacity development training Employment 
vovational ¢ Train women entrepreneurs for women market comer at cach and Training 
training village and m the growth centres ST- MT * MOLGRDE&C 
opportunities for | * Organize training from both public and private organizations for ls SME Foundation 
rural youth, better market access «PKSF 
women and Promote [CT based training using smart phone with low cost high- * Private sector 
disabled people speed intemet connection with mobile financial services for the «NGOs, INGOs 
womien entrepreneurs « DPs 
3, Promute training on Agri Service Centres for repuir and 
servicing of agriculture machineries ST- LT 
« Increase number of TVET training on agriculture machineries 
repair and servicing 
* Establish repairmg and services centres in the rural areas. 
4. Capacity development training for promoting Custom Hiring | MT-LT 
Centres for agriculture implements 
5. Strengthen co-ordination among the government agencies MT- LT 
 
es 147 ||

and reduce digital divide 
Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
Intervention frame verification and stakeholders 
2.4.2. Provide J, Increase access of formal sector finance for most vulnerable *incréased access to en. of small borrowers | * Report of * Bangladesh Bank - 
adequate credit, | » Increyse access of formal sector finance at low rate of interest to formal sector credit and | n. of skill training Bangladesh Bank} Microcredit 
technology, individual and group based agro-based and non-farm CMS | ST-LT | microcrodit for most courses availuble in |* Report of Regulatory 
information and | activities (see Aol 1.1.4 and 2.1.2) vulnerable sections of the} agro and non-farm | National Skill Authority 
other related * Promote CMS enterprises that use by-products population enterprise activities Development *PMO- National 
services forthe | «Fgcilitate market linkages (in line with the National Agriculture e Increased employment | *% of population with | Authority Skill Development 
rr ae er Policy (2014)) among underprivileged stake to aniait » National {CT Authority 
. « Make separate allocutions to target PwD groups, Wormer phones and ICT in} Household « MoICT-I 
and the broader ei rural areas Survey Division 
rural Re 2. Improve productivity of the use of credit * Mok- BTEB 
Sa a hasix | "CRY Out need-based training for acquiring skills in enterprise * MoF 
for the aoe activities ST- LT * MoLGRD&C- 
amearoNh « Transfer technology to borrowers from yulnerable groups " RDCD 
cecttona of the * Roll out community-based training targeting key rural industries . nae 
population « Provide skills relevant to rural infrastructure BSC nnn 
Develop range of community services and specially designed - ee INGOs 
courses. for incressed employment opportunities for under- ' p ce -- 
privileged groups (in line with National Skill Development Policy 
2020) 
* Develop and modernize existing TVET Institutes 
3. Extend support to organisations that promote women 
Sen ST- LT «Support organisations that promote women entrepreneurs in 
informa] and formal economy 
* Give access to finance schemes 
* Address gender imbalance in skill training 
4. Expand access to ICT, and cell phone connectivity in rural areas | ST-MT 
 
1481 |

nel dooms 'ss id Paialelehi mH nf heels Piet atl bbiddbl dicts f ENT KT 
- { acute od] waxininuble diets in all 
 Pillar Lil of the CIF2) 
© Adapt methodology fir doteriniting recommacnded dictury 
intake, energy and autrient requirements for different age, 
and phyalological and physical activity categories 
« Bytablish |oug-term targets for physical growth umay 
dynamic tools to ascertain per capita Consatptian of cencals 
and other foods for diversified food planning 
2, Carry out nutrient gap amatyals 
« Calculnt= nutrient gaps from HIBS nnd relased national food 
consumption data aot 
«Conduct national food consumption surveys 10 anges 
current nutrient intake und measurc the notent gop at 
individual level 
Calculates consumption tends and draw up lteer 
projections foc knowing the mie of dietary diversification of 
spovific foads'food groups 
« Use secondary datz analysis to identify the enabling factors 
and bamiers to nutrient intake and gap, in particular the 
availability, cost and affordability of nutritious dicts 
* Cary out indepth ennbysea to drivers for bealthy food 
coemumption 
LT 
 
3. Periodically update af national dietary guideline: and' 
implement them 
(as per NPAN2 Key Action Arva 62.9) 
eOutline science-based guidance 00 - food-bated 
fecammenditions for desirable detery Intake Update 
dictary guadctines bexed on Latent muiricni gap analysia and 
natant target for long-term frod planning 
« Use the cansolidated svt of general, age end diteare-specific 
guidelines as a policy too} in egricultery, food, and nutritian 
planning ed progrummes 
LT 
 
 4. Update FCTs and propose food list fer healthy dlety 
+ Cojlaborate with academia and FAD to periodically update 
Bangladesh PCTs to expamt the range of foods 
elnclude more foods with wider nutrient composition 
ieformation. non-nutnemt coepounds ef nutritional 
significance snd athee outritionally important consbtacnts 
LT 
 
 * FAOSTAT 
 
BNNC, NIPORT 
* MoFood- FPMU 
* MoF- DLS, DoF 
* MoA- BIRTAN 
« Dhaka University: 
INES 
+ HIRDEM, 
« WHO, FAO and 
other DPs 
# NGOs, INGUs 
 
EE 149 8 |

notably, dietary fibre, anti-nutrients, phytonutrients, 0-3 and 
n-6 fatty acids. 
«Document and develop lists of local, low-cost nutritious 
foods, considering the food patterns of ethnic groups, areas 
tike char, haor and hilly regions as well as traditional, 
underutilized foods (see Aol 1.2.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.2. Support the | J. Focus an smaltholder farmers ay important change ¢ Uptake of DDP across en. of upazilas in which | « HIES surveys | * MoA-DAM, 
implementation of | agents for improved food systems and nutrition sectors to ensure a healthy | a "Growth Center" has | = Reports of DAE, BIRTAN 
desirable dietary establish upazila growth centres to provide and sustainable diet by been established (as relevant * MoPood-FPMU 
pattern (DDP) plans | = services'facilitics from a single window (in line with NAP | ST-LT 2030 per NAP PoA 2020 ministries BPSA 
for a healthy and PoA 2020 Program |.6- see Aol 1.6.1) indicator for 1.6.1) « MaFL APA * MoFL 
sustainable food * Facilitate access to bank financing at affordable rate of « Per capita availability | «DAE APA » MoHEW 
system interest (see Aol 1.1.4 and 2.1.2) of a variety of foods | » National * MoPME « Promote food processing, packsging, labelling. preservation (rice, fruits, dictary 2020 * MoEFCC 
and effective storage through appropriate equipment, vegetables, pulses, * MoP- BBS 
technologios and trainings {in line with NPAN2 6.2.5 and milk, fish, ment, * BARI and other 
see Aol 1.1.2.2.3.1 and 3.2.1) poultry, egg) NARS Institutes 
2. Promote the productive role of women in the food system according to DDP ¢ Scheduled Banks 
value chain and provide required support targets = FAO and other 
*Engsge women in nutrition-sensitive agriculture, | ST-MT DPs 
horticulture, and livestock interventions * NGOs, INGOs 
«Provide technical support to women through training on 
diversified food production, post-harvest, and agro- 
processing activities 
* Encourage women's entreprencurship through Self Help 
Groups (in line with NAP PoA 2020 Aol 2.4.4) 
«Mainstream Nutrition Training' BCC with extension 
services targeting women 
3. Incorporate integrated nutrition guidance tools to inform 
Sood system for healthy and sustainable diets 
* Develop integrated nutrition guidance tools for uptake by | ST-MT 
sectoral policies and action plans (see Aol 3.1.1) 
* Ensure affordable and desirable foods for the vulnerable 
(see Aol 4.3.2) 
4. Enhance private sector engagement for market-based MT 
approach for safe and heulthy diets at affordable cost 
3.13. Expand 1. Recruit staff to work en nutrition-related matters (in line *<10% of vacant post for | en. of district * Repost from * MoHFW -BNNC, 
human resources with NPAN2 Key Area of Intervention 6.3.15, 6.3.20) houlth/nutrition service nutritionists recruited =| Human DGHS, DGFP, 
and strengthen «Fill vacant posts for health /nutrition service delivery | ST- MT delivery personnel will be Resource IPHN, NNS 
institutional personnel 
es 150) |

arrangements to 
improve performance 
of nutrition services 
with spectal emphasis 
on field level 
 
e Ensure sanctioned posts for required nutritionists in 
facilities hospitals 
 
2. Strengthen institutional capacity of BNNC (in line with 
NPAN2 Key Area of Intervention 6.5.10, CIP2 Programme 
V4.2) 
* Activate bodies (council, executive committer and standing 
technical committee) with required support from BNNC» 
with clear TORs and responsibilities 
eldentify nutrition focal points across sectors' divisions/ 
departments/ services with clear TORs and accountability 
«Establish national and sub-national level coordination 
architecture (district and upazila) for planning, information 
sharing at local level 
 
3. Enhance human resources capacity and nutrition 
expertise with multi sectoral training and experience (in line 
with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.3.14) 
«Organise nutrition sensitization training for all the staff 
related to nutrition activitics across sectors (including 
DNCC and UNCC members, extension workers, ete. 
 ST-LT 
 
filled up (in line with 
NPAN2 6.3.15) 
« District and upazilit 
nutrition coordination 
committee formed in all 
districts and upazilas (as per 
NPAN2 6.5.10) 
 
% of district and 
upazila nutrition 
coordination 
committees in place 
 
Information 
System 
» Gazette 
BNNC Office 
Record, 
Meeting 
 
* MoF 
* MoPA 
* MoLGRD&C 
* MoFood 
* MoPME 
*MoWCA 
«MoA 
* MoE 
* MoFL 
«MoDMR 
*MoSW 
* Molnd 
* MoEFCC 
* MoIB 
« MaPA 
*MoST 
* MoLE 
«Moc 
*MoWR 
*MoYS-DYD 
«UN 
* DPs 
« NGOs, INGOs 
 
SG

Area of 
Intervention 
 
promote local 
foodsd en, healthy 
cooking and food 
combinations, safe 
storage including 
knowledge on 
nutrient labelling 
 
 unce |) 
 
ai a , sood diclury 
. fy "ae 
1, Promote production and consumption of 
underutilized species NUS (in line with NPAN2 Key Action 
Area 6.2.1, CIP2 Programme fll.t) 
* Promote a key food list based on FCT that prioritizes locally 
produced seasonal foods ( Aol 3.1.1.) 
«Explore and promote NUS foods rich in micronutrients 
throughout the county, with o focus on coastal and CHT 
regions and considering factors of seasonality and climate 
«Include the nutritional value of the selected NUS in the 
FBDGs and FCT 
* Use FBDG and FCT as tools to promote NUS foods for 
biodiversity and food diversity 
 
neglected and 
ST- MT 
MT 
LT 
 
ruvec 
 
2. Develop nutrient-dense recipes {in line with CIP2 
Programme [11.1) 
*Continue to develop nutrient-dense recipes adapting to 
local practices 
«Promote nutrient dense recipes through nutrition training 
and demonstrations at community and household levels 
* Include demonstration of recipes on food-based nutritian 
integrated into horticulture, livestock, fisheries and school 
nutrition programmes and NNS 
* Disseminate recipe cards along with nutrition promotion in 
the community using mass media, online sources and 
national nutrition events 
ST- MT 
 
 3. Promote appropriate cooking techniques and safe food 
preparation (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.3.3) 
«Develop food-based nutrition training, BCC and muss 
media activities cncoursge appropriate cooking 
techniques (Aol 2.3.1), safe food preparation, handling, 
Storage, sanitary food service, hygiene practices and safe 
food consumption. 
«Promote nutritionally beneficial traditional methods (c.g., 
grinding, roasting, soaking, preservation technologies such 
as fermentation, pickling and sum drying) to enhance shelf 
life and conservation of nutrients 
 
 
coordinated multisectoral, 
multichannel advocacy and 
communication campaigns 
by 2025 (as per NPAN2 
Key Action Area 6.3.12) 
 
*At least 10 comprehensive | 
 
Objective 3. To enhunce the consuniption and utilization of healthy and diversified dicts for achieving nutrition improvements 
*n.of muss media 
activities on 
nutritional behaviour 
* n.of institutions 
promoting dictary 
guidelines(as per CIP2) 
 
 
* MoHFW 
report/Health 
bulletin 
« FPMU report 
Responsible actor 
und stakeholders 
 
 
 
 * MoHFW- IPHN, 
NNS, BNNC 
* MoFood- FPMU 
* MoA-DAE, 
BIRTAN, BARC, 
BARI 
*MoIB 
* MoE 
* MoPME 
*MoWCA 
* MoFL- DoF, DLS 
* Molnd 
* INFS, Dhaka 
University 
*BBF 
* BIRDEM 
* Bangladesh 
Knowledge 
Management 
Initiative 
*N-FAO, WHO, 
UNICEF, WFP 
and other DPs 
#NGOs, INGOs 
 
ee 1520 |

+ Integrate modules on such topics in the DAE and upazila 
level ugriculture extension services MT- LF 
 
4. Develop and promote tools for NBCC, food-based 
nutrition training and mass-media campaign (in line with 
NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.3.12) 
* Develop and update digitalized knowledge-based tools for 
online and social media (i.c, mobile phone-based messages 
or counselling, yideos, messages, NCB o-learning 
platforms) for nutrition and hygiene behaviour themes 
« Integrate NBCC with nutnition-sensitive interventions 
MT-LT 
 
5, Promote food based dietary guidelines with special focus 
on healthy diet and diversified food consumption (in line 
with NPAN?2 6.1.2.5, 6.1.3.3, 6.2.9, 6.3.13) 
* Orientation of the health care providers and extension 
workers on FBDGs 
* Scale up SBCC activities on healthy dicts 
¢ Disseminate the Healthy Food Plate and Healthy Mug to 
enhance knowledge and pructices on healthy dict and 
dictary diversity across the country 
*Promote nutrition labelling to encourage wise food 
purchase, stimulate healthy food demand and discourage 
consumption of junk foods (see Aol 2.3.1) 
*Develop and implement a comprehensive coordinated 
multi-sectoral, multi-channel, advocacy, and 
communication strategy on nutrition 
ST- MT 
 
6, Promote nutritious and safe diets for food service 
institutions across formal and non-formal establishments 
MT-LT 
 
 3.2.2, Scale-up 
integrated nutrition 
education strategies 
to enhance - 
consumption of 
healthy, diets, 
increase awareness 
of the nutricnt 
composition of local 
foods as well as to 
prevent and control 
malnutrition 
(undernutrition 
and overnutrition) 
1. Integrate nutrition components with homestead food 
production 
(in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 6.2.1 and Aol 3.2.1) 
*Conduct nutrition trainings that promote diversified 
homestead gardening and backyard poultry/ small livestock 
production/aquaculture 
* Mainstreaming nutrition trainings across DLS and DoF to 
promote small fish rearing und indigenous spovics 
LT 
 
 2, Promote "adolescent nutrition and healthy lifestyle" 
through formal and informal academic curriculum/training 
and SBCC programs (in line with NPAN2 Key Action Area 
6.3,7 and Aol 3.1.3) * Per capita consumption of 
fruits and vegetables 
400g per day 
(As per NPAN2)} 
« Total thinness among 
adolescent pirts (15-19 
years) <15% 
(us per NPAN2) 
 «% increase in per 
capita consumption of 
fruits and yegetables 
* % of thinness among 
adolescent girls (15-19 
years) 
 * HIBS, adhoc 
surveys and 
FPMU reports 
« FAOSTAT 
*BDHS 
 * MoA- DAE, 
BIRTAN 
*MoPME 
*MoFood- FPEMU 
*MoHFW- IPHN, 
NNS, BNNC 
*MoLGRD&C 
* Local Administration 
* MoE 
 
es 153 9 |

«Scale up formal and informal nutrition to disseminate 
knowledge on healthy dicts and lifestyle to adolescents 
«Sensitise school management, school teachers, parent 
teacher associations Scale up school-based informal 
nutrition education activities linking with wider platforms 
such as Nutrition Club, Community Support Groups, Girl 
Guides and Scouts. 
«Celebrate annual Nutrition Olympiad 
« Scale up NCB initiative create awareness on healthy dict 
and lifestyles among adoloseents and youth Disseminate 
and promote national dietary guidelines 2020 
e Enhance health secking behaviour of adolescents, young 
and teenage couples linking with School health 
progranylittle Doctor program/Adolescent Reproductive & 
Sexual Health 
LT 
 
 3. Update nutrition curriculum (formatinformal) at 
different levels of academic institutions (in line with NPAN2 
Key Action Area 6.3.8, 6.5.2) | 
« Update nutrition curriculum ut different levels of academic 
institutions (formal & informal) 
«Update nutrition content in primary, secondary, medical 
and nursing curricula. . 
Develop enteractive e-learning on nutrition 
* Review curncula for inclusion of nutrition education MT- LT 
 
*BMC 
* BIRDEM 
¢ LIN - WEP, FAO, 
UNICEF, WHO 
and other DPs 
* NGOs, INGOs 
 
es 1541 /

enhunce the consumption and utiliz 
 
Activities 
-- os ta" tos 
en SPOT ee teh e fe 
 
Gebel a3 jen Taad iy 50s war one AYRE BEEEEASOASEAEL PARE SCARED 2 UY ED. PE SAAR WY RIES, EINES SEE! 
I. Continue expanding child nutrition services via 
community-based IMCI 
® Prioritise community-based prevention approach to 
malnutrition via integration and delivery of ESP within PHC 
und community clinics 
* Scale up covernge of immunisation esp, in hard-to-reach 
rural areas and slums 
¢ NNS to provide support for technical interventions under 
IMCI 
 ation of healthy and diversified diets fo mate iy nhc OTS EVES CA) oh et Te) Cease Lem 
MT- LT 
Targets 
« Increased EPI coverage 
 
2. Strengthen social behaviour change communication 
(SBCC) to promote consumption of safe food and water for 
heulthy diets and nutrition of children (in line with the 8FYP, 
 
NNS OP 10.4.2, NPAN2 6.4.4., CIP2 Programme V.1.4. and 
NFPNSP Strategy 5.1) 
» Promote positive nutrition through SBCC and sensitisation on 
uptake of essential nutrition services as well as on food safety 
and healthy diet (see Aol 3.2.2.), and related complementary 
issued (water & sanitation, EPI, prevention of NCDs) 
* Build momentum through joint intersectoral actions around 
health-secking behaviour among conumunitics 
* Enhance health and nutrition awareness through electronic 
and print media and popular folklore 
* Continue, adapt and expand production and dissemination of 
muterials on food safety to DLS, DoF and DAE 
* Expand BFSN work in local communities 
MT- LT 
 
3. Strengthen research collaborations to better understand 
infection-malnutrition interactions 
* Study the impact of infection and sub-clinical conditions on 
nutrition and child growth/development and the interactions 
between nutrition and infection 
* Explore research collaborations with academia and agencies 
such as ICDDR-B who undertake advanced studies in this area 
* Further explore the effects of environmental enteropathy and 
malabsorption on nutritional interventions and carly 
growth/development 
e Gauge the impact of scaling up preventive and control 
measures of infections in malnourished chiliren/populations, 
or those at risk-of becoming malnourished 
Indicators 
ae MTSU MIU Lema hea site 
mortality rate 
« % EPI coverage 
* Number of children 
<5 years admitted in 
upazila health 
complexes, at 
district-level 
secondary hospitais 
and in medical 
college hospitals for 
diarrhoea and 
gastroenteritis of 
infectious origin 
(in line with CIP2) 
 
Means of 
verification 
* NIPORT- 
BDHS 
«ICDDR,B 
reparts 
* DGHS, Health 
Bulletin 
 
Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
 
 
« MoHFW- 
NIPORT, HPNSP, 
DGHS. NNS, IPHN, 
BNNC 
« MoP- BBS 
*MoWCA 
*MoA 
« MoFL 
* MoFood 
« City Corporations 
and selected 
munivipalities 
* Academia 
*NIPN 
« NGOs, INGOs 
« DPs 
* Private sector 
 
eee 1559 /

3.3.2. Strengthen I. Strengthen availability of dietary data for vulnerable 
 
 
 
 
 
the . MT- LT * Increase in % of 14-49 groups suffering from micronutrient deficiencies * not * NPAN2 * Moind 
arin ton * Include MDD-W in national surveys (c.g., BHDS, SVRS) Years a bisa, having national monitoring * MOHEW- 
Nutrition Services | * Monitor and cyaluatc impacts of food-based nutrition ' ; a ee fviteninA surveys reports NIPORT, DGHS, 
(NNS) delivery interventions on improvement of micronutrient status among + aise CRAKS _o collecting + HPNSP annual BHE, DGFP, MoP- 
integrated with targct groups (adolescents, women, ctc.) y 2025 (N ) data on Teports BBS ene * 90% coverage of adequately . MDD-W « INFS reports *MoA- BIRTAN 
targeting ohtidren 2. Promote food-baxed approaches within programs ta combat | yy-r_ 17 iodized salt (>1Sppm) by Coverage * Bureau of DAE, ATI8, NARS- 
and wonen micronutrient malnutrition (in line with NMDCS Strategic 2025 (as per NPAN2) of Heulth BARC 
suffering from Area 3.1.2) adequately Education reports | « MoPME 
persistent + Strengthen and scale up integrated homestead food iodized salt * BNNC reports |*Mok | 
Wenknéss and production through women -centered community actions in at and vitamin * MoA/DAE * MoFL, DLS, DoF 
micronutrient least 2/3rd households at union levels through training and A Reports *MoLGRD &C 
deficiencies better access to seeds, tools and materials supplement *BSCIC/IPHN/ | «MoFood 
« Establixh/promote schoo! gardening programs throughout the ation/dosage UNICEF ~ 
country 
NEAR ICCIDD i ' 3, Accelerate mainstreaming of nutrition services within the waters Samus | eee proposed delivery platforms of NNS Vorisuminigaiteddaisly| report Se 
* Continue and increase coverage of micronutrient distribution | yyy op iodized (>15PPTMM) 
through food fortification' supplementation programs for salts (as per CIP2) 
children, adolescent girls and PLW through community en of community~ 
based IMCI and community clinics pepe tara 
« Establish monitoring mechanisms to ensure compliance eect tees 
1, Promote nationwide supply of safe water to impact « Ensure availability of safe + Percentage of *SDG tracker * MoLGRD&C- 
household nutrition drinking water forall by urban and rural * MICS DPHE, WASA 
* Scale up piped water supply for the urban poor and tube 2030 (in line SDG 6.1.1) population with * DPTHE (APA) *MoHFW 
wells in rural areas with emphasis on underserved, un-served « 95% of schools with access ore to safe orren BBS 
3.3.3. Scale up the | 40d hard -to -reach areas, to basic drinking water king water ¢MoHFW - 
supply of safe « Ensure provision of safe adequate water in health care 2025 (in line with 8FYP) " [SDG6.1.1] (As NIPORT, - 
water for facilities to prevent infections and spread of disease ST-LT per CIP2) eT DGHS 
consumption and | » Provide safe water supply and training on safe water to « Proportion of Ce ee to domestic use atiaole schools with seccss ° sae pinoaat and 
# Increase targeted distribution of WASH items in emergency we seepage FAO, UNICEF and 
Programs SDG: 4.0.1 and other DPs 
8FYP) easiest 2. Promote the importance of safe drinking water for research institutions 
prevention af diseases 
* Promote effective low-cost "point of use" traditional 
interventions ST-LT 
 * Increase watcr quantity available to households by 
promoting more storage facilities and rainwater collection 
jars/containers 
 
156 8)

reduction programmes and recycling strategies as a priority. 
« Support capacity building of stakeholders and conduct public 
awareness campaigns for improved waste management. 
3. Support research development on under-explored areas © WaterAid and other 
related to impacts of contaminated water on food safety NGOs 
¢ Improve water quality monitoring (arsenic and saline * Private sector 
screening) and surveillance programmes MT-LT 
* Upgmde capacities of Pourashavas and WASAs for urban 
'water supply management 
e Underiake research on underexplored arcas relaled to 
unavailability of data on arsenic in livestock, freshwater 
fisheries, water/fodder for livestock and human health risk 
assessments 
¢ Undertake research to inform the uptake of nutrition 
'Sensitive interventions like use of saline water for 
fish/shrimp farming, rice farming and planting of saline- 
tolerant fruit trees, ete. 
3.3.4. Improve 1, Ensure sanitary and hygienic handling of food at * Proportion of population * Proportion of «MICS * MoHFW 
sanitary facilities | household and community levels with regards to food using safely managed population using « BBS- SID, * MoLGRD&C- 
and hygiene production, processing, storage, preparation Sattitation services, safely managed SYRS DPHE, WASA 
practices, * Provide trainings and demonstrations to DLS extension ST-LT including « handwashing sanitation services, | »INGO/NGO/DP;| «MolB 
including the officials at sub national levels (in line with Aol 1.1.2) facility with soap and water | including a hand- survey reports | «MoF- DLS 
prevention of * Scale up animal husbandry and veterinary services (in line (SDG indicator 6.2.1); 85% | washing facility * MoFood animal to human with Aol 5.1.3) by 2025 and 100% by 2030 with soap and water © MoE 
transmission of * Conduct training and promote education and (SDG indicator * MoP- BBS 
disease and sensitization/promotional activities among food handlers for 6.2.1) « NGOs, INGOs 
prevention and safe, sunitary and hygienic food handling practices » WHO, FAO, 
control of food 2. Promote measures (o ensure health of animals for safe diets UNICEF and other and:water- borne | (5 ine with CIP2 Priority Intervention 1.3.4 and SFYP) DPs 
Hiness ¢ Promate development of protective poultry housing and * Private sector 
animal shelter MT-LT * Municipalities and 
¢ Promote interventions targcting animal welfare management local bodies 
to ensure healthier animals for healthier dicts 
* Increase field capacity for detecting transboundary animal 
diseases 
3, Establish and promote garbage disposal and recycling of 
waste for environmental hygiene and human health 
protection 
« Identify cost-effective interventions involving waste MT-LT 
 
es 1575 |

Area of Intervention 
rutegy 4 1 Ir mere - 
 
 
making and planning of 
price support to farmers, 
market stabilisation and 
public food distribution 
$1.1. taper aecune | 
Activities 
RS i 2 BL en HS Rs oo muitrition- Shah Basle ul bea, he hoe bee. _ a p- ee a | 3 le + hb pu ct 'i 
stock, domestic production, and imports to 
inform procurement and PFDS decisions (see 
Aol 5.3.1.) 
lL. Improve monitoring ry Parner Ts 
. 
Time 
frame 
Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
Pratt an bilh USE ers, life cy BG Badd 5 TSS on UG LL PU eu e regions. 'on lg 
" 2 
 
2. Harness the potential of big data analytics 
to assess foodgrain availability, estimate 
required foodgrain imports, and set 
procurement prices and amounts and plan 
PFDS 
* Develop capacities - notably of FPMU- to 
apply modern [CT-based analyses and 
forecasting 
* Develop reliable forecasts the use of FAO's 
Food Price Monitoring and Analysis (FPMA) 
© Develop analytical capabilities to make 
decision on imports 
= Adopt state of the art methodologies to 
estimate foodgrain availability and 
production 
ST-LT 
 
3. Review the methodalogy to set the 
procurement price and amounts 
ST 
 
4. Develop an interministerial coordination 
mechanism to support decisions ST 
 
5, Adapt PFDS to NSSS priorities and 
changing approaches to social safety net 
programmes 
6. Plan to include nutritious foods under the 
PFDS 
* Procurement targets are met 
® Price are stable 
« % of procurement 
target achieved 
* Indicator IFPA for 
nce 
« PFDS distribution as 
% of target 
reports 
*FPMU 
calculations 
r 
stakeholders 
Responsible 
acto 
 " MoFood- DG 
Food, FPMU 
* MoA- DAM 
« MoDMR 
« MoP- BBS 
* DPs 
*« NGOs, INGOs 
 
4.1.2. Enhance the 
management of 
public 
food stocks and prices 
 1. Provide better information to farmers 
© Introduce digital display boards in 
marketplaces Look into other means of 
dissemination making use of ICTs 
 ST-MT 
 * Stock of 1.05 million metric 
tons of foodgrain are 
maintained at the beginning of 
the financial year 
 e Government stocks at 
the beginning of the 
financial year 
 « FPMU 
Teports 
 * MoFood 
*MoA- DAE 
» MoP- BBS 
 es 153 §/

stabilization activities 
and implement a 
nutrition sensitive PFDS 
« Educate farmers on procurement 
requirements 
2. Expand the use of the digital applications 
developed for the monitoring of procurement 
* Roll out the Krishoker App nationwide 
* Train officials across the country to use the 
inspection repatt management software, 
foodgrain movement programming software 
and food database introduced by the 
Directorate of Food 
J. Ensure suitable legistation and legistative 
mechanisms are in place for efficient 
foodgrain procurement 
4, Enhance the monitoring of food distribution 
and management of stocks 
* Devise transparent surveillance to monitor 
food distribution and stocks across the 
country under a single umbrella 
« Enhance existing digitalized system to 
monitor stock movement, stock rotation, and 
storage and transit losses 
ST-MT 
 
5, Develop systems to roll out nationally the 
distribution of non foodgrain foods through 
PFDS 
*« MoDMR 
*MoC 
¢ MoF 
* Private sector 
« NGOx«, INGOs 
«DPs 
 
 4.1.3. Ensure adequate 
storage of food grain 
maintaining quality and 
prevent deterioration of 
sored foodstuffs in the 
PEDS 
i. Refurbish and construct new warehouses 
for foodgrain storage considering local needy 
ST- 
 
2. Develop technology-based modern storage 
facilities (in line with 8FYP) 
¢ Develop vertical storege across the country 
* Focus on intensive production zones and 
disaster-prane areas to boost response 
capacity 
« Use modem technology to maintain 
quality: mechanized bagging systems, 
weighing and handling equipment and 
enhanced drying methods while maintaining 
moisture content and temperature to ensure 
the quality of stored foodgrain 
ST-LT 
 
 3, Rollout and distribute stored foodgrain on a 
regular basis 
 ST-LT 
 « Increase in storage capacity: 
up to 3.7 million metric tons 
by 2025 (as per 8FY) 
 * Public storage 
'capacity 
 * MoFood 
monitoring 
 * MoFood- 
Directorate of 
Food 
*« MoDMR 
« World Bank and 
other DPs 
 
ee 1595 |

* Rotate stocks regularly to prevent quality 
Joss and deterioration of the foodgrain 
* Upgrade monitoring systems m place at iocal 
and national level for smooth rotation of 
stocks 
 4. Develop storage for new foods to be included 
in the PFDS that will preserve their quality 
and attacks from pests ST-MT 
 
a 1605 |

Area of Intervention Responsible actor 
and stakeholders 
Medco. cT be. = ti eh a access (0 wen sensitive te qibbac unos Bes: nets across life cycle with a focus on vulnerable groups aac regions 
42. 1. Teetaaes the Sreneaee 1 Shortlist nacaueata and Taian for * > Attica of adaptive | « Extent of reduction in * MaFood 
of agriculture systems upscaling for each "disaster hotspot" technologies and practices | direct economic loss monitoring * MoDMR 
through various mechanisms) identified in the BDP 2100 are upscaled attributed to disasters *MoA 
notably climate-smart * Initial list ST-MT | «Improved water | in relation to GDP 5 technologies, adoption of management (SDG 1.5.2) MoFL 
stress-tolerant crop * Second fist MT-LT * MoL 
varieties and - * MoLGRD&C 
implementation of good * MoWR- 
agriculture, animal . husbandry and fisheries | 2. Adopt measures and infrastructure to soccer a 
practices for the enhance water management ST-LT 
production of healthy food | See Aol 1.1.3 Development 
3. Strengthen extension and advisory | ST-LT Board. 
services for technologies and practices *MoCHTA 
prioritized for different disaster hotspots 
See Aol 1,},.l and Aol 1.1.2 
4.2.2, Increase the disaster- | 1, Develop a policy-relevant vulnerability | ST-MT | © Policy and planning is * Policy-relevant Project data ¢ MoDMR 
coping ability of poor index informed by risks and vulnerability index *MoSW 
oe families, support | 2. Promote homestead agriculture vulnerability developed eMoA 
home-based farming =-S_|_ # 'romote homestead agriculture, especially | ST-LT | « tnorensed homestead * n. of households *MoC 
especially through Amar through implementation of Amar Bari agriculture Amar Bart Amar * MoF 
Bari Amar Khamar (My | Amar Khamar Kh e MoHEW Home My oli Remo and ¢ Enhance quality and availability of gender- ee) | 
protect poultry, livestock | sensitive extension services to support 
and other asscts homestead production (see Aol 1.1.2). 
ae 1618)

3. Protect houxchold assets during 
disasters 
e Invest in protecting houschold agricultural 
assets and farm machinery, such as by 
building facilities in shelters and killa (see 
Aol 4.2.3) 
eSupport fumilics with practical measures 
such as to cover pond ombankments with 
nets to retain fish if ponds overflow in 
disasters. 
« Increase household and community-based 
storage facilities. 
ST-LT 
 
4. Invest in resilient infrastructure 
eStrengthen facilitics, such os medical 
centres and schools, 
«Build more resilient water supply and 
sunitution infrastructure. 
ST-LT 
 
5. Develop insurance schemes 
«Facilitate the development of insurance 
schemes Via public-private-NGO 
cooperation for losses duc to disasters and 
climate change, by developing previous 
and ongoing efforts 
ST-LT 
 
 
4.2.3. Ensure operation of 
nutritious and safe food, 
safe drinking water, 
sunitation and healthcare 
for disuster-affected 
people, especially for women, elderly, disabled 
L. Invest in emergency shelters, disaster 
proofing infrastructure and early warning 
systems 
* Build new multipurpose shelters 
* Rehabilitate shelters, and upgrade water, 
sanitation and healthcare facilities 
* Make buildings for basic public services 
more resilient 
* Strengthen early warning systemu 
ST- LT 
 
2. Use PPPs to increase capacity 
Draw MoUs between GoB and owners of 
commercial buildings, 44 suggested in 
2011 Cyclone Shelter Construction, 
Maintenance and Management Policy 
ST- LT 
 
 3. Enhance capacities and participation in 
Shelter operations 
« Increase training on shelter operutions and 
participation of vulnerable groups ST- MT 
 
* Greater protection of the 
populstion from disasters 
* Shelter design and 
management more inclusive 
of gender, elderly, disabled 
persons and children 
 
en, of usable cyclone 
shelters (CIP2 
indicator) 
#n. of disaster resistant 
homes built in rural 
areas to cope with the 
impact of climate 
change and disaster 
risk 
 
«MIS 
®SDG 
monitoring 
 
*MoDMR 
*SPARRSO 
* Bangladesh 
Meteorological 
Department 
 
es 162) |

* Improve the Guidelines for Disaster 
Shelter Management 
 
4.2.4. Facilitate and 
coordinate disaster 
response, mitigation and 
rehabilitation through 
timely and strategic storage 
of public food stock, rapid 
distribution to disaster- 
affected people, and 
effective mobilization 
through various modalities 
including public-private 
partnerships 
J, Strengthen policies and procedures for 
disaster management 
@ Strengthen policies and procedures for 
disaster mansgoment 
*Strengthen union und upazila disaster 
management committees 
ST-MT 
 
2. Enhance pre-positioning of public food 
stacks 
* Improving the use of data, ICT and carly 
warning methods in locating PFDS 
«Increase safe storage capacity in remote 
areds 
ST- MT 
ST- LT 
3, Strengthen logistics in disasters 
* Follow-up on 2019 Logistic Preparedness 
Action Plan ST-MT 
 
4. Encourage private sector involvement in ST- LT 
 
5. Promote shock-responsive and 
anticipatory social protection 
* Build on 2019 conference on shock- 
responsive social protection 
* Build on 2020 experience of forecast- 
based social protection 
ST- LT 
 
 6. Enhance attention to nutrition in 
disaster management 
e Include Nutrition Coordination 
Committees in disaster management 
«Ensure complementary foods for 6-23- 
month-old children 
¢ Strengthen human and monitoring 
capacities for nutrition in disasters 
¢ Include diversified nutrient-dense food in 
disaster responses ST-LT 
 
e Enhanced effectiveness and 
inclusiveness of emergency 
food distribution 
 
* Enactment of a legal 
framework to 
implement the 
Standing Orders on 
Disasters 
« Change in budget 
allocation to disaster 
management 
 
Project data 
 
* MoDMR 
«MoSW 
*MoA 
«Mo 
e MoF 
« MoHFW 
 
as 1631 |

Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
frame verification and stakeholders: 
OBJECTIVE 4: To increase access to nutrifion-sensitive social protection and safety nets across life cycle with a focus on yulnerable groups and regions 
_Strategy 4.3. Strengthen social protection for poor and vulnerable groups, including disabled and displaced __ _ 
4.3.1. Strengthen social 1. Expand and consolidate programmes in *People who are unable to | en. of eligible children | *MoFin report | «MoWCA 
protection in line with NSSS work are covered by social | in Child Benefit on social *MoSW 
disadvantuged areas and elncrease covernge of food and cash | ST-LT protection Scheme protection #MoDMR 
for disadvantaged proups | transfers for those unable to work *"% of social protection *® MoFood 
2, Report social protection coverage and transfers going to *MoCHTA 
budget data by vulnerable places and by urban areas * MoFood- 
vulnerable groups ST-LT Statistics and 
Vulnerable places are chars, haors, hill Informatics 
tracts, remote areas and urban slums Division 
e Vulnerable groups are poor female-headed * MoF- Finance 
households, children, elderly, disabled Division, 
peopile, displaced people und minorities Financial 
3. Include FNS indicators in NSSS | 7 947 is aa management systems - Division * MoLGRD&C- 
4. Initiate Child Benefits Scheme | 57 LGD 
*lnitiate in divisions identified in 8FYP 
*®Expand coverage in later years MT-LT 
5. Increase the use of G2P payments | sy 
Initiate G2P fund transfer as stated in 8FYP 
e Expand G2P progressively MT-LT 
6. Develap a more comprehensive approach 
fo urban social protection ST-MT 
elncrease urban coverage in programmes 
Develop national social insurance scheme MT-LT 
Bere ee sucstd sect proavtoncenta Hos ohh NORE ® Seasonal FNS iy ensured |e a. of beneficiaries in [° MoF report on |» MoDMR 
nutritionally vulnerable, | * Expand coverage seasonal social social * MoFood 
especially female-headed | * Consolidate programmes STeET pene protection * All other 
households, during «Focus public works on disaster-risk " ee © Programme ministries and 
periods of seasonal crises | reduction Cover fisherfolk when fishing is * Nutrition indicators MIS data agencies involved 
and food shortages banned Sores ae in social safety 
2, Continue direct food transfers and pre een subsidized foods P 
* Continue and expand FFP and OMS ST-LT 
I 164 8)

3. Surveillance of seasonality in nutrition 
* Develop seasonal nutrition monitoring and 
knowledge 
«Develop measures against seasonal 
nutrition vulnerability, especially for "first 
1000 days", adolescent girls, pregnant 
women and lactating mothers 
4.3.3. Develop and 
implement nutrition- 
sensitive social protection 
programs, including food 
fortification, nutrition 
education, and behaviour 
change communications 
1. Scale up the inclusion of fortified rice in 
the FFP and OMS, diversify the food 
distributed in social protection 
programmes, and monitor impacts on 
nutrition 
2 Enhance the social protection 
programmes for nutritionally vulnerable 
women of reproductive age and children 
during the first 1000 days 
eExpand existing interventions with 
supplementary nutritional food 
*Expand the =matemity allowance 
programme 
ST- LT 
 
3. Enhance and integrate NBCC into 
social pratection 
«Enhance dictury and nutrition knowledge 
for all 
«Disseminate information on dictury 
knowledge, healthy cooking methods, 
nutrient dense-recipes, dictary diversity, 
appropriate TY CF practices, food handling, 
preservation, storage, food safety issucs 
ST -~MT 
 
4. Expand the School Feeding Programmes 
in Poverty Prone Areas 
ST -MT 
« Improve nutritional status * Share of fortified rice 
in PFDS system 
en. of students under the 
school feeding program 
= PFDS MIS 
* MoPME MIS 
= MoFood 
« MoHFW 
*MoWCA 
= MoLGRD&C 
«= MaDMR 
* MoPME 
» MoF 
 
 43.4. Ensure proper 
coordination and co- 
operation to integrate 
social protection with 
agricultural development, 
income generation, and 
micro-entrepreneurship 
development I. Expand and consolidate productive 
social protection programmes in line with 
NSSS 
*Re/design programmes towards activities 
that stimulate sgricultural diversification 
and agro-processing 
*Scale successful programmes to increase 
coverage and impact ST-LT 
 «Share of social safety 
net programme budget 
in GDP 
en_of trained young 
people in income 
generation 
 * MoFin report 
on social 
protection 
* Labour Force 
Surveys 
 *MoDMR 
*NSSS Livelihood 
Cluster 
* MoLGR&C- 
LGD, RDCD 
*MoWCA 
* MoSW 
 
eee 1658)

*Reform and consolidate programmes in 
coordination with the NSSS Livelihoods 
Cluster 
2. Coordinate productive social protection 
design with My Village; My Town 
investinents 
«Ensure that productive social protection 
programmes make use of new 
opportunities, including in upazila master 
plans 
ST -LT 
 
3. Improve training and skills in productive 
social protection programmes 
eImplement 2011 National Skills 
Development Policy 
* Re/design taining for needs of women 
and young people 
* Scale up and improve the quality of 
vocational training programmes, 
* Encourage private training services 
ST- MT 
 
4. Scale-up productive social protection for 
women and other excluded groups 
ST- LT 
 
 5. Adapt social protection programmes to 
young people ST- LT 
 
© People who are able to work 
are: included in productive 
social protection 
* Productive social protection 
programmes and My 
Village, My Town promote 
rural transformation in 
coordinated way 
 
* MoF-Finance 
Division 
« MoLE 
« MoFL 
 
(1661)

Activitios 
agree on @ common strategy and define roles 
© Carty out a resoarve needs assessment 
# Define the strategie direction for BFSA 
«Develop 9 common food safety suategy with choarly 
defined soled amd tesponsihilities of difforont 
agencies'ministrica 
* Harmoniae taws, roles, rezulabons 
«Ensure gucdetines for the implementation of quarantine: 
and impart policy orders 
«Introduce up to life-term imprisonment agains! the 
affense'of ndultcrating food and medicinal products 
1. Marmteie Une, deh: regetiiann sad sanders = 
frame 
pedir. onto Li dancin nei food feted Ledaterdab ey pee aI NA ado a st si cae 
 
ST-MT 
mrdiistios, capacity bo 
* Common food 
sirateey adrosa 
Egencies and 
ministries with clear 
roles 
* Lewx, miles, 
reguistions und 
Sturselurdds harrmnisieedd 
aceos# the 15 et 
* Scict guidelines for 
mnepections 
2. Develop guidelines for safety daspections 
*Develon 2 BRSA . Operation Procedure fit 
food safety axsurance plarcs 
* Trin port teams to tample'send wamples for test in 
accredited laboratories located in ports 
*Bosure thut usictines. include all the clementy of 
inspection und ¢erlifiestiott systems for the food 
production, processing, preparation, marketing aad 
iinported foods 
«Build upon existing initistives -vuch ay the GFSI- to 
tscilinate rade und export 
eFnyure legislation clearly, establishes authocitics 
required to implement contra] aver non-conmptintt local! 
imported food 
MT LT 
LT 
Uevelapod 
 
 J, Strengthen existing capacities anal build mew ones 
« Promote comprchensive analyst training programmes 
«Tram and recruit more skilled manpower 
» Provide refresher traming to existing stuff 
*Develog exp network of duly accredited 
labxiratories for fino aufety sent expant servicws 
« Sireagthen BSTI's capacitics 
 ST-LT 
 
Indicators 
* National Pood Salety 
 
Means of verifeution 
ding und partherslip far effective 
 
 * MoFou!- 
BSA, FPMU 
«MoST-IPST, 
Eanglaiesh 
Council of 
Scientific 
and Industrial 
«Moint- BAB, 
BSCIC, BSTI 
*MoA 
*MoFL, DoFixh 
Dob 
«Mork 
«Farmer 
Aisooiatings 
* Private sector 
 
ES 167 8!

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
4. Strengthen the capacity of the Bangladesh 
Accreditation Board 
* Strengthen BAB to accredit inspection! certification | ST- MT 
bodies based on international standards (ISO 17020 and 
ISO 1702} 
eSupport its application for membership to the 
International Accreditation Forum 
* Promote BAB ability to accredit independent 3TM party 
inspection 
«Expand the certification and inspection coosystem in 
Bangladesh beyond government-owned institutions 
MT-LT 
5.1.2, Develop, 1. Develop and strengthen the national food safety * National PoAon Food |* Existence of National PoA onjeFood safety |» MoFood- BFSA, 
improve, and control system (in line with NPAN2 Key Strategy 6.2.5, Safety/Food Safety Food Satety/Food Safety strategy, FPMU 
establish and 6.5.8) iST- MT Strategy, Guidelines Strategy, Guidelines and SOPs | guidelines and |» Molnd- BAB, 
traceability * Explore blockchain as a means to ensuring traceability and SOPs prepared -| e Identified number of violations) Standard BSCIC, BSTI 
mechanisms and | « Look into barriers and challenges to blockchain expansion « Functional BACB of food safety standard under) Operating * MoST- IFST 
enforce (c.g., availability of high-speed internet services, capacity «improved food safety | FSA 2013 reported by BFSA) Procedures * MoHFW- IPH 
regulatory to use technology, policies/ regulatory frameworks) practices along the FVC) (CIP2 indicator) * BFSA reports ls MoLGRD&C, 
frameworks to « Enforce compliance to act/laws/guidelines related to food Igy py en. of trainces on GAP, GAgP,|* MoA and MoFLle MoA- BARC 
control food safety during production/processing/marketing/ GHP and GMP (CIP? indicator)| APA * MoFL 
the food supply - | « National Food Safety Management Advisory Council to * Farmer . 
chain support BFSA to strengthen national food safety control aysocistions 
system l* Private sector 
* National Food Recall System to empower the authority to Cae 
enforce provisions associated with food recall and Dats iraccability vate sector 
Take legal actions against those in violation of these PHO ENCES provisions 
2. Prepare stratexy, guidelines and Standard Operating IST-MT 
Procedures (in line with NPAN2 Key Strategy 6.5.8) 
3. Build an ecosystem of accredited independent 
certification and inspection agencies IST-MT 
«Ensure conformity of foods for consumption through 
uccreditation from certification agencies, inspection und 
laboratory services 
1639 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
*BFSA to coordinate with private enterprises that are 
setting up GAP certification services 
* BAB to provide guidelines and procedures on conformity 
assessment activitics 
4. Strengthen linkages with INFOSAN (in tine with 
NPAN2 Key Strategy 6.5.8) ST- MT 
* Scale up the capacity of the BFSA and build linkage with 
Codex/INFOSAN and enhance accountability for the Food 
Safety Law 2013 
* Build capacity of the Codex and INFOSAN focal! points 
and enforce measures to ensure food safety along the yalue 
chain 
5. Strengthen product certification to ensure quality and 
safety ST- MT 
*Introduce and scale-up GMP and GHP including 
adherence to HACCP 
* Make Bangladesh Agricultura) Certification Body which 
provides Bangladesh GAP Certificate functional 
6. Provide training and enable implementation of food 
safety practices (in line with NPAN2 Key Strategy 6.2.5. |ST-LT 
and 6,5,8) 
«Develop skill/build capacity two related persannel on food 
safety 
« Promote food preservation and effective safe storage 
* Provide technical support to producers and processors for 
assurance of food safety ulong the value chain 
* Introduce and popularise GAP, GAgP and GHP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1.3. Develop and | J. Develop an extensive field campaign ST-LT | «Consumers informed | ¢n. of consumer awareness *BFSA reports | « MoFood- 
promote 2. Support and strengthen forums such as CAB and ST- LT and aware of best forums coordinated with *FPMU BFSA, FPMU 
education and BFSN food safety practices | BFSA Monitoring . « MoF 
somsumer =| 3, Curry out risk assessment and risk communication | ST for handling, en. of Safe Food Campaigns *MoA 
awareness on food |, BFSA to establish a Risk Assessment Unit cooking, storing and | « Risk Assessment Unit « MoF 
safety * Define clear rotes and responsibilities for risk serving food. established by BFSA * MoP- BBS 
assessment, risk management and communication, + Dissemination of risk * AUs 
* Devise tmining plan for food inspectors assessment studies * Civil society 
and reports on food organization 
safety nationwide 
 
169 fi |

Ana of 
Intervention 5 Targets Means of 
verification 
Responsible 
actor and 
stakeholders 
 
« Communities 
« Consumers" 
Associations 
*BFSN 
* Cooperatives 
* Private sector 
«CAB 
« DPs 
* NGOs, INGOs 
 
ee 170 |

$.2.1. Minimise on- farm food losses 
"1. Formulate a National Strategy on Food Loss and Waste 
(as per 8FYP) 
 
2. Provide tools to improve timing of harvest 
* Expand availability of tools (moisture meters, smart meters 
for maturity measurement) 
« Provide better access to market and weather information 
« Improve farmers' skills and knowledge 
* Sct up focal information networks:(sec Ao! 1.1.1.) 
ST- LT 
 
 
3. Promote mechanisation and affordable loss-reducing 
technologies (as per Aol 1.1.1.) 
« Expand usage of combine harvesters and other agricultural 
harvesting and cultivation equipment 
* Encourage investments in flatbed drycrs to use rice hull as 
fuel in order to reduce biomass waste 
« Develop on-site farm waste processing technologies 
« Use recyclable waste from fishers to produce quality foed 
(see Aol 1.1.6). ST-LT 
 
« National Strategy on 
Food Loss and Waste 
formulated 
e Climate smart 
technologies 
developed and 
disseminated to 
farmers even in the 
most remote arcas of 
the country. 
« By 2021 50% reduced 
post-harvest losses by. 
2025 (asperNAP 
PoA 2020 Key arca of 
intervention 2.1.1) 
«In 100 upazila by 
2022, reduction im 
post-harvest losses: 
| + National Strategy 
on Food Loss and 
Waste formulated 
« On-farm loss for 
main commodities 
¢ n. of farmers 
trained on FLW 
 
"es: MoPood and 
FAO reports 
of FLW 40-5 
* DAE and 
MOoFL reports 
 
| « MoFood- 
FPMU 
* MoA- DAE, 
DAM. 
« MoFL 
* MoP- BBS 
« NARS 
institutes 
including 
BLRI, BFRI, 
BARL, BINA 
* Agricultural 
University 
« CIMMYT 
ICRISAT 
« Farmer 
associations 
 
ee 171 0 |

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities: Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
Responsible 
actor and 
stakeholders 
 
« Promote the use of intelligent decision-making tools, 
sensor technologies, and new processing technologies to 
recover and make use of edible portions of food 
* Strengthen GAP and GAgP 
* Develop/ promote poxt harvest treatments (e.g, bot water 
treatment for disinfection, techniques to inhibit sprouting 
ofitems such as potatoes or anions, fungicide application 
(see Aol 1.2.2)) in collaboration with private sector 
+ Develop solid basement and/or control zones development 
near fish catching points 
« Create an environment that promotes FLW reduction: e.g., 
access to finance (see Aol 1.1.4); stable supply of 
clectricity and water 
4. Encourage the development and adoption of climate smart 
technologies and practices (as per Aol 1.1.1.) 
« Promote investments in research of varictics that can resist 
acute climate events, resist pest and diseases and better 
withstand harvest (as per Aol. 1.1.1.) 
Develop/ disseminate improved seed varictals with sbort- 
lived and flood-tolerant features to allow Aaor farmers to 
harvest before a flash flood 
ST- LT 
 
 
5. Improve and develop on-farm storage (see Aol 2.].1.) 
+ Improve cxisting storago conditions and expand modern 
food storage facilities, esp, for perishables 
* Provide finance to individual farmers to help them access 
refrigerated units (as per Aol 1.1.4) 
« Expand fresh fish storage in improved fish containers such 
as Styrofoam boxes 
+ Construct community storage of grains in cach Union (as 
per NAP PoA 2020 Key ares of intervention 2.1.1 and 
2.1.2) 
« Develop Low cost Zero Energy Cool Chambers 
« Increase capacity of licensed warehousing to help farmers 
store their produce safely and economically 
* Promote development of specific types of storage for 
certain commodities 
 ST- MT 
ST- LT 
 
20% by 2023; 40% by 
2026 and 60% by 
2030 (as per NAP 
PoA 2020 Key area of 
intervention 2.1.2) 
« SDG 12.3.1. 
monitored on a regular 
basis 
 
« Information 
and Advice 
Centres 
(FIAGs) 
« Private sector 
* NGOs, INGOs 
* FAO and other 
DPs 
 
es 172 § |

Area of 
Intervention 
Activities Time 
frame 
Targets Indicators Means of 
verification 
Responsible 
actor and 
 
6. Shorten value chains (in line with CIP2 MR20 
Programme 5,2) 
* Minimise number of intermediaries between the ime food 
13 produce to the moment it sold te the consumer 
« Strengthen the role of POs and cooperatives (1.1.9) and 
promote inclusive cooperative/group-based processing and 
marketing (Aol 2.2.4) 
» Encourage consumption of local produce (Aol 1.2.3.) 
ST-LT 
 
7. Involve and sensitive all value chain stakeholders ta 
develop solutions (see Aol 5.4.2) 
» Create multi-stakcholder networks 
* Make intemational connections to learn from other 
countnics' experience 
* Promote training and field demonatration programmes to 
sensitise producers to the issue of losses 
« Carry out studies to help plan activities across the supply 
chain structure and identify critical loss points, their causes 
and the likely solutions to address causes 
ST- MT 
 
8. Improve data available on farm food losses 
* Adopt pilot.and apply the recently approved methodology 
on SDG 12,3.1. 
« Improve and harmonise data eco-system enabling 
production and computation of relevant indicators along 
with proper monitoring and reporting mechanisms in place 
« Ensure that agriculture and run! statistics -including 
information on food Josses- are coherent, reliable, 
internationally comparable as per the Bangladesh Strategic 
Plan of Agricultural Statistics (2016-2030) 
« Strengthen the statistical capacity to produce FLW-data 
(see Aol 5.3.2) 
« Examine both quantitative (or physical) FLW and 
qualitative (nutritional as well as economic) FLW 
* Involve private sector in monitoring of FLW 
ST- MT 
ST- LT 
 
 5.2.2. Reduce off- 
 4. Develop, invest and apply appropriate technologies (in line 
with Bangladesh's Delta Plan 2100) 
« Encourage simple innovations ¢.g., replacing sacks by 
plastic crates and altemmative packaging techniques 
* Modemise public warchouses and expand private storage, 
cold storage in particular 
* Modermise domestic sisughterhouses & live birds' fish 
markets « Same as 5.2.2, 
« All actors of the food 
VC sensitized to the 
issuc of food losses 
 Off-farm 
losses for 
large and 
medium 
FVCs 
n. of cold 
storage units 
 * MoFood and 
FAO reports 
of FLW 
monitoring 
* DAE. BBS 
Statistical 
Yearbook 
 MoFood 
FPMU 
MoA- DAE, 
DAM 
* MoFL 
« MoP- BBS 
* MoLGR&D- 
LGED 
as 1731 |

Area of 
Iatervention 
Activities 
ff 'Targets indicators Means of 
verification 
 
 
* Expand controlicd atmosphere storage, modified 
atmosphere storage, heat treatments, use of ethylene 
scrubbers/ ethylene inhibiting compounds, postharvest 
fungicides, sanitizers, biotechnological tools for perishable 
horticultural commodities 
* Draw on other countries' experiences 
2. Increase food processing capacity 
* Promote simple technologies such as drying as well as 
secondary and tertiary processing 
ST- MF 
 
3. Improve transport infrastructure (in line with Ao] 2.1.1.) 
» Improve transportation infrastructure 
* Develop transport with cooling and ventilation systems 
* Develop intermodal transport connections and networks & 
other means of transport, notably inland water transport 
ST- LT 
 
4. Create an enabling environment for FLW reduction with 
focus on the private sector 
* As for on farm food loss reduction (see Aol $.2_1), ensure 
that basic conditions and incentives ure in place to attract 
stakeholder' attention to act on food loss reduction 
(Aol 2.2.2 and Aol 2.2.3): finance, regular water and 
energy supply, transport 
* Facilitate technological transfers and knowledge on food 
losses (Aol 5.5.3) 
» Ensure rules, regulations and standards are in place & 
enforced (Aol, 5.1.1). 
ST-LT 
 
5, Involve all value chain stakeholders to develop solutions 
and sensitise them to the issue of food losses 
» Encourage multi-stakcholder involvement for solutions/ 
draw from existing experiences (Aol 5.2.1) 
* Document best practices and engage communities in 
planning and implementation 
* Sensitise actors along the value the chain to the relevance 
of this problem (as advocated for in(A_] 5.2.1 and 5.23.) 
and impart training on how they can contribute to 
minimise i 
 6, Improve data available on non-farm food losses 
See intervention 9 in Aol $.2.1 ST- LT 
 
available 
(CIP2 
indicator) 
% of 
upavila and 
union road 
network in 
good and 
fair 
condition 
(CIP2 
indicator) 
 
« LGED 
 
+ Information 
and Advice 
Centres 
(FLACS) 
« Private sector 
« NGOs, INGOs 
* FAO and other 
DPs 
 
ae 174 8 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
523. Tackle food ; = 3. Tackle food |» oon; to * Mandatory nutricm * n. of domestic * MoFoodand | « MoFood- aa J. Senate people a protien of food waste and to the labelling and product | - processed foods FAO reports | FPMU, BFSA, 
a | Continue seanpalicne to ccdeite ST-LT information on at with nutrient labels of FLW Directorate of 
» Target children and youth least 50% of all food monitoring Food, BSTI, 
* Raise awareness on portion or serving sizes and. produits sold in = BST tepors. | Mold 
standardized food preparation quantities in homes and in urban market ¢ MoE 
institutional food service e MoPME « Focus on "Plate" waste in hospitals, canteens, schoo! * Moc 
cafetcrius, restaurants and hotels and event organisers * MolB 
* Provide training on how to conserve and preserve food ¢ MoHEW 
* Promote public campaigns and advocucy such as the UN ¢ MoEFCC 
international Awareness Day on FLW : eee " . : vision: Consider adoption of foreign innovative initiatives « FAO and othet 
2. Labelling (see Aol 2.3.1 and 3.2.1) DPs 
« Ensure nutrient labelling and product information on foods * NGOs, INGOs 
* Participate/contribute to the current debates ST- MT ° CAB o. 
« Adapt laws and regulations' give incentives and training + Civil society 
especially to MSMEs involved in value chain o Peivele sector + Federation of 
3, Support technological innovations to ensure re-use and STLLT Bangladesh 
repurposing of waste u Chambers of 
4. Introduce innovative/modern solutions for waste = tiaeentioa 
reduction through mobile applications and networking * Metropolitan 
5: Improve date available on waste Chamber of « Monitor food waste situation in different settings of the Commerce 
country (sec Strategy 5.3) and notably Food loss . ened utaniry 
percentage (FLP) for different food commodities, Food ST- LT ° Dhaks 
Loss Index (FLI) for different food commodities, FLI Chamber of 
aggregated for food losses at national level, national Commerce 
recycling rate (tons of material recycled) SDG 12.5.1 and Industiies, ¢ Include physical, nutritional and economic waste Bangladesh * Supermarket 
Owners" 
Association 
 
es 175 8 |

OBJECTIVE 5: To strengthen cross-sectoral food aud nutrition s 
 
Activities 
nce-based | 
1 L Setupa FNS data strategy for a comprehensive network of ENS | 
 
 
 
Targets 
ecurity governance, coordination, capacity building and partnership for ¢ 
 
Indicators 
- 2 ? = ar 7. r S tn ee alt a in an Oe, 7S in ie. § mMmiiLoring, c ation. 7 ne e' OTF OC : 2 7 - 9. =e wees -_-- ees eo ' > _ 2 
{fective policy implementation 
 
 
 
 
. » Agreements and 
generate, information systems protocols for data | FNS data relevant Agricultural 
disseminate and Perform a comprehensive FNS data asyessment ST exchange are generstion/exchange | agencies wing 
ensure access to * Enhancing the role of BBS in collecting, compiling and devised and approved by BBS * MoFood- 
reliable and timely disseminating statistical data implemented FPMU 
FNS data and * Develop agreements and protocols for data exchange between ST-LT « Institutional * MoA- DAM 
information by different institutions capacity and * MoF 
setting up aninter- | 2 Strengthen capacity and budget allocation of all FNS data budgets of FNS- * MoFL.- DoF, 
agency FNS data | collecting agencies through RBM approach collecting Dol. 
sharing * Strengthen capacity of BBS agricultural wing, DAM, DoF, Dol., agencies * MoEFCC- BFD mechanism DoForestry increased * MoP- BBS 
« Increase budget allocation of BBS agricultural wing, DAM, DoF, # FNS tustitutional Agricultural DoL, DoForestry ST-LT framework for Wing, IMED 
« Adopt RBM approach to assess institutional needs and gauge Ss =a * MoA- DAM 
activity planning of different agencies involved an * MoF, ERD 
* Strengthen M&E function within data collecting agencies * MoFL- DoF, Do 
3. Leverage Hilt initiative by building on existing FNS institutional » MoHF W- [PHN 
framework for data management PMO, BNNC 
* Build on success of existing FNS national dota mangement * MoD- 
systems | ST-LT SPARRSO 
* Integrate HiH with SPARS SPARRSO AIMS, NIPN and FPMC . oe and other 8 
4. Integrate the Aid Information Management System (AIMS) with = LCGs 
the Hil and investment planning ST-LT 
* Integrate AIMS with the new CIP, NIPN and HiH rejevant data 
5.3.2. Develop and | Jj. Develop human resources to harness the opportunities offered by «Big data analytics | « Frameworks * Reports by | * MoP-BRS 
implement a Big | pig data analytics MILT | are fully in use governing data the aE 
data analytics « Carry out training poker = vstituti across the access and use for | relevant ing, IMED 
ecosystem for the . "et atti e eS tos ENG oan Leet different units of all government agencies * MoA- DAM 
food system the government institutions * MoF 2. Develop a big data governance framework MT-LT working in FNS collecting and/or 
 
 
es 176 0 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
* Establish frameworks governing data access and use for all « Functional big storing * MoFL- DoF, 
government institutions collecting and/or storing agricultural/ FSN data governance agricultural' FNS DoL 
data (in line with the e-Government Master Plan for Digital framework data in place * MoEFCC, 
Bangladesh 2019 and the PP2041) established * Existence and DoForestry 
« Adjust regulatory and governance framework (see Aol 2.1.4) and « Hi benchmark monitoring of * MoFood 
ensure private data protection indicators created Hil benchmark « MoHFW, 
3. Combine big data with spatial data by - indicators = PANG 
+ Leverage Hill initiative and SPARRSO activities (see Aol 5.3.1) to | ST ET | monte Se LAaD) integrate big data with spatial data » FAO 
« Consider and pilot a system: of incentives for the provision of Private 
farmer level data in order to obtain data in synergy with rural organisations 
digitalization and financial inclusion 
4. Facilitate the connection of ICT industry with Nutrition Sensitive | sT. 7 
Value Chains 
«Ensure that FNS-related government actors have [CT units able to 
effectively implement Digital Bangladesh (in line with the e- 
Government Master Plan for Digital Bangladesh (2019) and the 
PP2041) 
* Exploit investment potential of private sector through PPPs © The new CIP * The new CIP ¢ The newCIp| « MoFood- 
5.3.3. 1. Design a third CIP for local sustainable and modern food systems formulated produced and ¢ MoFinance FPMU 
Operationalise ¢ Curry out extensive consultations among stnkeholders ST-LT | «FNS Programme operationalized budget * MoP- BBS 
implementation of | * Involve new FNS partners is embedded allocation Agricultural 
the NFNSP 2020, | * Assess the inclusion of multiple data sources (including non- within MoHFW reports Wing, 
its Plan of Action structured onc¢s) and MoFood . Mes _ Desens 
programmes yearly ing Hay ay | 2 Set up a unified institutional framework for NENSP PoA, SDGS | sr-17 | «Monitoring monitoring | National and the new CIP : through an . outputs are reports Accounting 
effective M&E . Involve new FNS partners and stakcholders especially at local level produced and Wing, IMED 
system . fee new wilys of involving DPs not only through LCGs but utilized by *MoA- DAM 
50 more operationally multiple * MoF 
3. Strengthen the monitoring framework leveraging on existing stakcholders * MoFL- DoF, 
initiatives and synergizing with the private sector ST-LT DoL 
«Engage with various FNS stakcholdets through consultations or * MoEFCC- 
surveys to establish roles, commitments and expected monitoring DoForestry 
outputs eFPMC, FPWG, 
« Synergize with other ongoing initiatives such as SUN movement, TTs 
Hi, AMIS * Local level 
institutions 
es 177 8 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
* FAO and other 
DPs 
* Relevant LCGs 
*HiH 
* AMIS 
*SUN GoB focal 
point in 
Bangladesh 
e Related SUN 
Networks 
* Private sector 
5.3.4. Ensure the | /. Set up a unified institutional framework for NFNSP PoA, SDGs See Aol 5,3.3. and 5.5,1 
cross-sectoral and the new CIP 
integration of the | « Sce Action 2 of Aol §.3.3. ST-LT 
NFNSP, PoA and | 2. Strengthen the cross-sectoral integration of NFNSP PoA and its 
its investment plan | investment plan by leveraging on existing initiatives and synergizing 
with other ENS- | with the private sector ST- LT 
related initiatives | « See Action 3 of Aol 5.3.3. 
and its coherence | 3. Strengthen capacities of BFSA, Bangladesh National Council, | ST-LT 
with national socio- | and Food Planning and Monitoring Unit 
economic « Sce Actions 1, 2 and 3 of Aol 5.5.1 
development 
efforts 
ae 175 ||

Targets | 'Indicators | Meansof -_| Responsible actor | verification and stakeholders 
[Area of Intervention | Activities 
H 
 
OBJECTIVE 5: To strengthen cross-sectoral food and nutrition security governance, coordination, capacity building and partnership for effective policy implementation 
ON eee TY 
 aaa = - = 
5.4.1: Develop and | 7, Adopt consistent practices of integrated nutrient, pest, * GAP widely adopted - | # n, of courses delivered |* Agriculture Statistics | * MoA-DAR 
 
 
 
implement effective | and crop management ST-LT - | «Reduction in premature} on GAP (as per CIP2|}eNCD surveillance | * MoHFW- IEDCR, 
regulatory » Orientution of extension workers on GAP mortality from NCDs by} MR) [PHN 
es and e Training of farmers on GAP a third by 2030 relative] «Mortality rate *MoWGA, NCDC, 
guidelines for ; to 2015 levels (in line| attributed to DGHS priority Issues 2 Strengthen monitoring and enforcement system under with spc! cardiovascular ie: BES 
the BMS Act (ax per NPAN2) target under 
* Increase awareness in the community on exclusive 3.4) disease, cancer, * Molnd- BSTI 
breastfeeding for the first 6 months followed by ST- MT diabetes ar PP + MoLaw appropriate complementary feeding after 6 months respiratory disease . ea FPMU, 
« Initiate penal action sgainst promoters and advertisers of « MoF 
BMS BNN 
© Train adequate human resource to generate awareness at i M See 
the community Jevel eMoC 
* Create an enabling environment for women to breastfeed eicddrb 
at the workplace and in public spaces ° BRE ° 
« WHO/ National 
3. Enact a Right to Safe Food Act ST Institute of 
4, Develop reguiations with guidelines for enforcement to Se rei 
prevent and control NCDs nen 
Implement OPs of 4% HPNSP (2017-22) and a 
Multisoctoral Action Plan for prevention & Control of ST-MT 
NCDs (2021-25) 
* Develop guidelines for nutrition labelling 
« Develop guidetines/standards limiting high sugar, salt, 
and fat, and banning industrial transfats 
« Ban advertisement of ultra-processed and unhealthy 
foods targeting children 
« Impose tax on sugar 4weetened drinks, and ultra- 
processed junk foods 
« Carry out awareness campaigns through print and 
electronic media 
5. Formulate enforcement rules under the Competition |___ 
Act (2012) ST-MT 
* Formulation rules 
Generate awareness on the Act 
 
 
5.4.2: Strengthen I. Strengthen the capacity of BBS to disaggregate data by \ST-MT |» Availability of ender|» Data by sex and social} Survey Reparts « MoP- BBS 
gender gender and social groups disaggregated data to} groups * MoL 
es 179 8 |

Area of Intervention Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible actor 
- _ frame verification and stakeholders 
mainstreaming for 2. Promote access to land by wamen ST-MT design effective policies | «n. of land records «Land records with j#MoA 
food and nutrition » Digitise land records with joint title for FNS digitised with joint | jointtitle *MoP 
security * Register government khas land distributed to landjess in «Women have access to| title * Policy document * MoFL 
women's names or joimt names land in line with gender) « Women's * Document e MoLaw 
* Prioritise poor, destitute and physically challenged strategy of RFYP Empowerment in ¢ Survey Report / * MoFood- FPMU 
women in distribution of kas land Agriculture Index Impuct * MoF . 
* Include women in Management of Sairat Mahal (c.g. * Assessment Report |e Private sector 
Jal-Mahal, Sand Mahal, Stone Mahal, Shrimp Mahal) ® Survey Assessment |e DPs 
@ Scnsitizec officials in the MoL on gender issues * NGOs, INGOs 
3. Ensure wage parity for similar agriculture work done | ST 
by men and women 
4. Mainstream gender in agriculture extension and scale | ST-MT 
up Agriculture, Nutrition, and Gender Linkages 
(ANGeL) initiative 
5, Integrate gender dimension inte food loss prevention | ST-MT 
strategies (see Strategy $.2) 
5.4.3 Develop and 1, Establish National Bavironment Management Council * Mangrove area * Mangrove area * NEMC reports °® PMO 
promote climate- (NEMO) increased by 50,000 ha |e Green Growth ¢ Green Growth * MoEFCC resilient food * Formalise constitution of NEMC ST by 2025 (SF YP target) | Stmtepy Strategy * MoL 
systems Constitute NEMC © Strategy for Green ¢ GHG emissions ® MoA 
2, Restore mangroves in coastal areas ST-MT oe neo © MoF&L 
« Develop plan for restoring mangroves along the lines of yarems * MoLGRD&C 
the ICBA-AR project and roll ont * MoP 
3. Examine and learn from green growth strategies for | ST-MT a MoP 
food and agriculture * MoFood 
* Study best practices on green growth in food systems * MoF&L 
und climate resilicnee and develop strategy * MolB 
* Update NDC with target for reducing GHG emission *MoFA 
from agriculture * Private sector 
4. Operationalive Climate Fiscal Framework 2020 ST-MT ees - 
* Develop and operationalize innovative climate finance ; 
sohemes 
* Engage with private sector for financing climate resilient 
food systems 
Build capacity and demonstrate pilots in partnership 
with NGOs'CSOs 
5. Take the lead in addressing climate resilience on the | S717 
 international scene 
 
ee 180 f |

Area of 
Intervention 
ral 
5.5.1. Strengthen 
policy uptake, FNS leadership and 
institutional 
capacity of relevant 
secretariats and 
public institutions 
 
- - etl TE 
| 1. Strengthen capacities of the BFSA 
rad) ee Rata lea ere 5 
i er ae er Se ee 
JBJECTIVE 5: To strengthen cross-sectoral food and nutrition security governance, coord 
ST- LT 
 
2. Strengthen capacities of the BNNC iST- LT 
 
3. Strengthen capacities of the Food Planning and 
Monitoring Unit 
iST- LT 
 
4, Assessment and monitoring of FNS governance system ST-LT 
 
5. Use the FNS CIP Monitoring Reports as well ay NPAN 2 
Monitoring Reports to annually re-atign FNS investments 
to NFNSP goals 
ST- LT 
 
 6. Broaden participation of Local Consultative Groups 
(LCG) on ARDFS, DER, Health, Population and Nutrition 
iST- LT 
 
Targets 
os 
«Strengthened BFSA 
* Strengthened BNNC 
* Strengthened FPMU 
© More effective capacity 
strengthening 
FNS investments closer to 
NFNSP and NNP 
e Wider and active 
purticipation in LCGs 
elmproved capacity 
 
Indicators 
indicators for 
BFSA/BNNC/FPMU to 
be determined by the 
respective capacity 
strengthening project 
* Annual monitoring report 
* Alignment between 
Monitoring Reports and 
pipeline projects 
en.of different 
organisations in the 
LCGs an ARDFS and 
DER 
|e BESA «BNNC 
*FPMU 
¢ Annual report 
® Monitoring 
Reports 
@LCG minutes of 
mectings 
 
 
|eBFSA 
«PMO, BNNC 
eFPMU 
#PMO, BNNC 
eBFSA 
elPH 
* DPs 
 
es 131 8!

* Organise workshops and training programmes, including 
exchange visits, fellowships and human resource time 
sharing 
*Promote partnerships and collaboration between local 
stakeholders: government or non-state (civil society and 
private sector organizations) and consumer associations 
* Develop formal communication mechanisms and 
information exchange facilities 
* Create and operationalise collaborative platforms 
* Establish a monitoring, evaluation and learnmg mechanism 
Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
$5.2, Strengthen I. Review and assess the role of local institutiony in je Local government en.of functional «FPMU r MoFood, FPMU 
the capacities at achieving FNS . authorities play a greater | subnational FNS monitonng © All ministries 
subnational level | » Map local institutions, record and categorise their relevant {51 role as regulator and activities including state, involved in FNS, 
including local activities coordinator non-stale and consumer at national and 
government, HON- |g Examine service delivery capacity of different actors and associations subnational level 
state actors and identify their current/potential engagement en. of collaborative le Local level private 
CORSEMICE ® Gauge bottlenecks in local level operation and management platforms between local sector ; 
associations by *Examine role of public offices und local government actors Sent on facilitating "ae? BeAr : ¥ i": Lnowladee authonties' and their capacity constraints ct 
exchange and je Consumer partnerships 2. Develop a capacity development plan along with learning associations 
resources « DPs 
© Orgunise development orientation training course design ST-LT le Private sector 
for local leaders, enablers and public officials z 
*Develop learning materials, tramers, demonstration 
resources 
e Supply guidance planning, implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation of local level implementation of national, 
multi-sectoral, sectoral and locally initiated FNS 
development efforts 
® Support for better function of FNS networks 
* Establish coordination committees 
3. Implement a capacity enhancement strategy for FNS 
stakeholders including measures to promote partnerships 
and collaboration ST-LT 
 
ee 182 1 |

3. Enhance access to extension advice through innovations 
and use of digital technologies 
» Establish technology village in all upazilas {as per Aol 1.5.2 
of the NAP PoA 2020) 
® Strengthen capacity of extension services and update their 
knowledge 
eUse ICTs for extension service delivery, especially for 
hard-to-reach users 
@ Make use of PPPs in the provision of extension Services to 
farmers. 
elncrease public-private coordination to accelerate 
disseminstion of technologics developed by the public 
sector and NARS in particular 
© Promote cooperatives to help smaller actors engage with 
supplicrs and research institutions (as per Aol 1.1.9) 
ST-LT 
 
Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators. Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders. 
$.5.3. Strengthen 1. Identify bottlenecks and catalysts of knowledge and e Changes in relevant «Changes impolicies #FPMU ¢ MoFood, FPMU 
private sector technology transfer te the private sector policies towards en, of Technology monitoring « MoST, [FST 
capacity by « Identify characteristics of different private agents that can [S2-MT | strengthening private sector! Villages across the * MoA-DAE, 
promoting the thwart or encourage transfers to/ adoption by private sector capacity by promoting the} country district level 
transfer of - eldentify economic, structural, behavioural und policy transfer of technologies and agricultural 
technologies and factors that may influence private agents to adopt -or not- knowledge officers. 
knowledge new technologies (e.g. lack of land property rights) e Technology Villages in all * MoFL, DoF 
eFind exogenous factors thatcan have a role in facilitating upazilas by 2023 (as per * NARS and other knowledge transfer Aol 1.5.2 of the NAP PoA public research 
@Look into types of demand from consumers that will 2020) institutions 
influence whether actors along the food chuin gre willing to w increases, nvolvement. of © Other research adopt more advanced technologies PRvate sector im extension institutions and 
universities 
2, Conduct a policy review in view of updating the National ; PAO aoa Science and Technology Policy 2011 and streamline other oth st DPs 
relevant existing policies ST * NGOs, INGOs 
 
a 183 8 |

Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
4. Promote international technology transfers 
e Seck partnerships with other countries in order to promote 
North-South and South-South transfers ST-LT 
* Strengthen partnerships with CGIAR institutes and other 
relevant institutions and promote South-South partnerships 
(in line with NAP PoA 2020 Aol 3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.3.6) 
5. Improve the investment climate 
* Consider changes mm Jaw and regulations 
@Undertake required public investments such ag | ST- LT 
infrastructure (roads, markets) to create an environment that 
is appealing to investors 
5.5.4. Establish J. Harmonise of the understanding of the goals and ¢ Partnerships in place ® USD size of FNS projects |# PPPA Annual |e MoFood, FPMU 
frameworks for objectives of the NFNSP uphold set standards, involving Government Reports ¢PMO- PPPA 
national and « Build capacity and carry out advocacy activities across.all |ST-MT | ensure value for money and) and NGO partners « FPMU © Ministries 
subnational FNS sectors of society produce expected results [en.of members in FNS monitoring involved in 
stakeholder * Sensitise different stakeholders to their social responsibility le Number of PPP relating tol umbrella organization NENSP 
partnerships to -especially youth FNS increases e Private sector 
ensure mutual 2. Establish rules for partnerships, an accreditation system » Increased cooperation e Federation of 
accountability, and monitoring between government and Bangladesh 
transparency and |. A5point focal point officials in line ministries and |ST-LT | NGOs Chambers of effectiveness and departments » Functional umbrella Commerve and 
operationalise an « Define rules and obligstions in partnerships organisation in place Industries 
umbrella ¢ Create un uccreditation system to guarantee standards in e Large numbers and varied |e Metropolitan 
organization for partnership exchanges types of organisstions Chamber of 
the active ¢ Regularly assess standards, effectivencss und efficacy of participate in the FNS Commerce and 
RENEE of partnerships debates of the country Industry 
_ i a th e Establish simple coordination system through MoUs through the umbretls }¢ Dhaka Chamber 
E 3. Raise the profile of the PPP programme and promote a ae ee and) 
increased flow of private investment (as per Strategic REE 
Objective 3 of the PPPA APA) ST- LT je Bangladesh 
*Raise profile of PPPs and put incentives in place to Supermarket 
encourage private investment contributing to the NFNSP Owners . 
(see Aol 2.3.3.) | Association 
© Develop a legal and regulatory framework os per the PPP ° Edible Oil Act 2015 Industry 
e Limit bureaucracy in establishing partnerships 
e Draw upon other countries" experience 
 
 
 
a 14 8

« Ensure regular and durable funding 
 
 
 
Area of Activities Time Targets Indicators Means of Responsible 
Intervention frame verification actor and 
stakeholders 
4. Expand cooperation with NGOs especially for nutrition DPs 
services LCG AFSRD 
*Promote parmership with NGOs to expand the reach of | ST-LT Research 
community clinics in rural areas and in urban arcas to Organisations: 
address urban nutrition with targeted emphasis on slum Universities 
areas NGOs and INGOs 
© Exploit the widespread networks of NGOs even in most NGO Affairs 
remote areas Bureau 
5. Establish and operationatise an umbrella organisation 
e Create umbrella organisation to streamline the} ST 
considerable FNS effort taking place through NGOs, 
academia, research institutions, other CSOs, and the private 
sector, both at subnational, national and international level 
« Obtain consensus on the best setup im terms of purpose and 
role, size, location, structure, role and governance 
® Actively engage stakcholders such as associations, clubs, 
foundations, platforms and other institutions, especially 
youth 
¢ Allocate resources for the getup of this institution and its 
operationalization ST- LT 
 
185 0 |

8. Responsible Actors and Coordination 
Responsible Actors and Stakeholders 
The matrices in Chapter 7 list, for each Aol, the main responsible government agency as well as the 
stakeholders. Figure 4 maps this, reflecting the complexity of the food system*"*. MoFood, MoA, 
MoFL, MoF and MoLGRD&C figure in the five Objectives. The private sector, also key to meeting the 
goals of the NFNSP has a vital role to play under each Objective and includes farmers, food 
processors, retailers as well as all the other actors involved along the value chain (e.g,, transporters, 
storage owners), Operating in different forms - big companies, MSMEs, cooperatives, etc. Research 
plays a role under each Objective with the involvement of national and international institutions, 
including universities. R&D emanating from private actors is also key in Bangladesh and needs to be 
incentivised and knowledge exchange between different stakeholders promoted. Civil society and 
NGOs also holds an important role across the PoA. Finally, DPs support a wide range of food security 
initiatives across the five Objectives of the PoA, mostly in partnership the government and NGOs, 
In order to ensure the availability of safe and nutritious food -Objective 1-, responsibility for 
implementation lies mainly with MoA, MoFL and for specific Aols, with the Ministry of Water 
Resources (MoWR) and MoLGRD&C (for the promotion of water-efficient and environmentally 
friendly alternative irrigation technologies) and MoPEMR (to estimate the potential contribution of the 
Blue Economy). Research -both public through the NARS institutes, agricultural universities and 
private sector- plays an important role in developing new technologies and improving crop varieties, 
animal breeds and fisheries towards enhanced sustainability, diversity and nutrient content, 
International organisations such as the CGIAR institutes also contribute significantly to technology 
generation and dissemination. As stressed in the NAP PoA 2020, NGOs also substantially contribute to 
implementing agriculture sector-based programmes at the grassroots level. 
To ensure access to safe and nutritious food at an affordable price -Objective 2- MoInd, MoC, MoA, 
MoFood, MoLGRD&C and the Ministry of Planning (MoP) through BBS, play leading roles although 
several other ministries are involved. Likewise, the private sector is a key partner in nutrition sensitive 
food processing, value addition and in creating earning opportunities along the FVC. Banks and MFIs 
also feature in this objective for their role in providing the means to invest in food processing businesses. 
NGOs are key in the promotion of income generation activities as well as in the development and 
empowerment of women and the provision of microcredit. 
In terms of the implementation of Objective 3 which secks to enhance the consumption and utilization 
of healthy and diversified diets for achieving nutrition improvement, the primary responsibility rests 
with MoHFW with BNNC overseeing the nutrition governance of the country, MoFood, MoA (through 
BIRTAN and DAE) and MoFL, MoWCA, Molnd (through BSTI). Civil society is also critical in 
promoting adequate nutrition. NGOs for example, are key to ensure delivery of essential and 
comprehensive nutrition service packages in urban areas and especially slums. 
The main ministries involved in implementing Objective 4 which seeks to increase access to nutrition- 
sensitive social protection and safety nets across life cycle with a focus on vulnerable groups and regions 
are MoDMR, MoFood, the Ministry of Social Welfare, MoA and MoFL, MoHFW, the MoC and MoP 
through BBS. The Cabinet Division is closely involved in periodic reviews and monitoring progress of 
safety nets. Other stakeholders and NGOs are important in managing shocks. 
Because of its cross-sectoral nature, Objective 5 which seeks to strengthen cross-sectoral issues of FNS, 
notably food safety, food loss and waste, governance and to this end, the coordination, capacity building 
and partnership for effective policy implementation which by nature involves many ministries and a 
host of non-government and private stakeholders. 
 
© Ministries have been listed in acronym form and by alphabetical order. 
186 § |

Figure 4. Responsible actors and stakeholders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT 
MOA DAE CAM, Mol GDRC_LGED, 
BADC, SCA AIS BROB, RDCO 
Mee MoP, BES BST, 
McCHTA Planning Cammizsion 
MoEFCC MGPEMA, Blut 
MoF Exonemy Call 
NOFA MoS, MMD, 
MoFL, GLRICRS Chitiagong Port 
Daft Authorty & Custome 
MoFood, BESA MoWR, WOS, WARPO 
MeriA- Coast Guard National Port 
MoHPVE Auithortly 
MoL, DLS PMO. PPPA 
PRIVATE SECTOR 
CIVIL SOCIETY PRIVATE 
BAE NGOw INGOs SECTOR 
PSF World Sant, Accrediied PDRF FAQand Foot 
Krishi Bathe CAB 
RESEARCH 
Als 
BARC and 
othar NARS 
inatitules 
CIMMYT, CIVIL SOCIETY 
CREA PKS ADB and 
i Phun 2-SAFE other OM 
Foundation NGOs HFS INGOs 
Controlot MPis and 
lodine Nor-Bank 
ans Detclenoy Flt Disorders World Bank, FAQ and 
Mod. BIRTAN. 
DAM, DAE ATS OGFRIPHN, service 
MIPORT, DGHS, Mol, Pubse 
other Dts 
Mat 
Tod, DAE. DAM, BADT MoICT, ICT Division 
Farman' information Molnd, BSTI, BSCIC, 
and Advice Cantera. SMEF 
{FIAGa), RIRTAN, BARC WoLGRDC,LGED, Roco 
Mom, BBS, BFSA MoPA 
MoC, Bangiadeut MOPEMR, SPD 
Competition MoS, FST 
Contimiusion, FTA Wing MoWCA 
MaCiT- ICT Division MoYS, DYD 
MoE, STED, OTE, BMET PMO. PPP Authority, MoEFCC 
MOF. Skita for 
Employment 
BEZA, Nationa Skill 
Devalypmant Authority 
Investment Programme Bangladesh Renk, Credit 
MoFood, FPML, DG 
Food, DoFood, BST! 
MoFL 
MoHFW, BFSA IPHN, 
SNK 
Information Bureau, 
Microcredit Raguiatory 
Aunthonty 
Local government 
authortins 
 
 MoE-Schoct NNG.HNPSP, Sroodonsiing PMO, BNNG 
 
 
eS 137 8 | 
Twatbook Boat Bureau ot = Moind Gly Conporages, 
MoEFDG Maat MoLGROC, - sasected MeF Educeton, NNP LORD. DPHE municipaliten 
MaFin (NESE) = WASA and loom bod} 
MOL, OLS, Oractorataat Mota = Ls DorSH. BLAI, Famity Mo® ist, aes Pariners 
MoFeed, Panning, MoPA 
FPMU, BFSA 
 
 
 
 
 
WHO, FAQ, UNICEF and 
otter OP 5, NPN

Coordination mechanism and monitoring 
A necessary condition to operationalise this PoA is to monitor its implementation regularly to assess 
progress and adjust interventions accordingly, The institutional arrangement for the monitoring of the 
PoA builds on the existing FNS institutional coordination framework and monitoring mechanism which 
produced the previous food policy, investment, and action plans. However, this PoA identifies new GoB 
agencies as essential FNS partners and emphasises the role of local level institutions and the 
participation of the private sector, including MSMEs and farmers' organisations not only in 
implementation but also in validating the results of the yearly monitoring exercise. To this effect, it is 
proposed that new GoB agencies, local structures, and the private sector, are integrated in the 
institutional and monitoring setup. 
Adequate representation of relevant agencies- including the ones newly identified as important- will be 
reflected, as appropriate, in: 
1. The Food Planning and Monitoring Committee (FPMC)** - a cabinet level committee chaired 
by the Food Minister which includes Secretaries from key FNS ministries. It provides strategic 
guidance, leadership and oversight in planning, coordination and monitoring in all aspects of 
FNS. It also establishes a high-level commitment to inter-sectoral collaboration; 
2. The National Committee (NC), also chaired by the Food Minister, currently comprises the 
secretaries of key ministries and divisions, heads of universities/research institutions, DPs, 
private sector and NGOs. The National Committee oversees the CIP implementation and 
monitoring processes; 
3. The Food Policy Working Groups FPWG** - chaired by the Food Secretary, a national level 
inter-ministerial coordination mechanism at both technical and operational level; 
4. Thematic Teams (TTs) which bring together ministries/government agencies carry out the 
monitoring activities relating to the policy and associated plans of action and investment plans 
under the technical, operational and secretarial support of the Directorates of the FPMU. **° 
It is suggested to complement the NC with five Regional Committees (RCs) which would cover 1. 
Sylhet and Chattogram; 2. Rangpur and Rajshahi; 3. Khulna and Barishal; 4. Mymensingh; and 5. 
Dhaka. These would contribute to the implementation of the PoA and the monitoring process by 
providing a local perspective. The formation of Regional Technical Working Groups (RTWGs) will 
also be envisaged from the district level institutional arrangements to provide a sub-regional perspective 
in terms of data and policy implementation and yalidation*". This will complement the role of FPWG 
to ensure inter-ministerial and cross-sectoral and integration at national level. RTWGs would provide a 
good reflection of the cross-sectoral and public-private coordination at district level in support of the 
TTs* responsibility of gathering PoA-relevant information and data collection. The regional 
consultations that took place in formulating, validating and approving this PoA, in the midst of the 
Covid-19 pandemic, demonstrated that virtual events can be effective and cost-saving, and can ensure 
a high degree of participation. They may therefore be considered as a regular way to hold regional 
consultations and RTWG-related events and meetings, 
The Local Consultive Group on Agriculture Rural Development and Food Security (LGD - ARDFS) 
will participate in the PoA monitoring validation process with the involvement of relevant FNS 
 
*** The list of members of FPMC can be found at hitp://fpmu_gov.bd/agndrupal/food-planning-and-monitonng-committee 
**° The members of FPWG are listed at hitp://fpmu.gov bd/agridrupal/food-policy-working-group 
+ The five TTs reflect the five pillars of the NFNSP: 
lL. TYT-1 Diversified Production 
2, TT-2 Market access and value addition 
3, TY-3 Food consumption and utilization 
4, TT-4 Nutrition-sensitive social protection 
5, TT-5 Food safety, data and governance (Cross-cutting) 
257 Participants of the RT WG to be based on the list of participants invited to the regional consultations on the PoA formulation, 
|) 133

development partners. Other LCGs relevant to FNS - for example, the LCG on Disaster Risk Reduction 
(LCG- DRR) and the LCG Health- will be consulted at appropriate junctures of the PoA implementation 
and monitoring. LCGs are designed to contribute towards effective and coordinated implementation of 
national policies, strategies, plans and programmes. 
Figure 5 illustrates: (1) coordination and strategic guidance which moves from the top (from FPMC) 
down (up to TT level) and (2) monitoring which from the bottom (TT level) collects data and informs 
policy makers. 
To effectively prioritise interventions and the related Investments, a new Cl P needs to be designed and 
monitored (Aol 5.3.3), The PoA monitoring is structured in a way that may also accommodate the 
monitoring of the new CIP. 
Figure 5. Institutional framework 
rete Me Stuy 
and Monttoring 
Committes 
= WC sted t 
: Committee 
 <1, | Be 
 
as 1390 |

191 8! 
9. Annexes

Annex 1. List of Acts, national policies, strategic and planning documents cross-referenced in the 
PoA 
Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021- 2041 (PP2041) 
Eight Five Year Plan 2020-2025 
Second Country Investment Plan for Nutrition-Sensitive Food Systems 2016-20 (CIP2) 
National Agriculture Policy 2018 (NAP) 
National Agricultural Policy Plan of Action 2020 (NAP PoA) 
National Agriculture Mechanization Policy 2019 
Bangladesh Agricultural Good Practices Policy 2020 
National Livestock Policy 2007 
National Aquaculture Development Strategy and Action Plan of Bangladesh 2013-2020 
National Poultry Development Policy 2008 
Animal! Disease Act 2005 
Bangladesh Animal and Animal Product Quarantine Act 2005 
Fish Feed and Animal Feed Act 2010 
Animal Slaughter and Meat Control Act 2011 
Breeding Policy 1992 
Final Draft National Livestock Extension Policy 2013 
Strategic Framework and Action Plan for the Application of a One Health Approach in 
Bangladesh 2017 - 2021 
Bangladesh Delta Plan (BDP) 2100 
Bangladesh Country Investment Plan for Environment, Forestry and Climate Change 2016-2021 
Bangladesh National Conservation Strategy 2016 
National Water Policy 1999 
Local Government and Rural Development Sector Strategy Paper 2018 
National Strategy for Pourashava Governance Improvement 2016-2025 
Upazila Act and the Union Parishad Act 1998 (amended 2011) 
Bangladesh Public-Private Partnership Act 2015 
Policy for Implementing PPP Projects through Government to Government (G2G) Partnership 

PPP Annual Performance Agreement 2018-2019 
Competition Act (2012) 
National Cooperative Policy 2012 
Cooperative Socicty Rule 2020 
Bangladesh Economic Zones Act 2010 
National Nutrition Policy 2015 (NNP) 
National Plan of Action for Adolescent Health Strategy 2017-2030 
Second National Plan of Action for Nutrition 2016-2025 (NPAN2) 
Bangladesh Dietary Guidelines 2020 (Draft) 
Multi-sectoral action plan for prevention and control of NCDs 2018-2025 with a three-year 
operational Plan 
e 4th Health, Population and Nutrition Sector Programme 2011-16 (4th HPNSP) Operational 
Plan (OP) Non-Communicable Disease Control! 
e National Nutrition Services Programme 2011-2016 (NNS) 
| § 192

BMS Act 2013 and its Rules 2017 
National Edible Oil Fortification Law 2013 
Action Plan for Implementation of National Social Security Strategy 2016 - 2021 (NSSS) 
Cyclone Shelter Construction, Maintenance and Management Policy 2011 
Guidelines for Disaster Shelter Management 
National Women Development Policy 2011 
National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Bangladesh 2020-24 
National Youth Policy 2017 
National Social Security Strategy Gender Policy 2018 
Intellectual Property Rights Policy 2018 (NITPRP) 
Bangladesh Strategic Plan of Agriculture and Rural Statistics 2016-2030 (SPARS) 
National Skills Development Policy 2011 
Bangladesh Strategic Plan of Agricultural Statistics 2016-2030 
Food Safety Act 2013 
Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework 2020 
Nationally Determined Contribution of Bangladesh - Implementation Roadmap (2015) 
ee 103 8

Annex 2. Comments from the regional consultations consolidated by region and NFNSP 
objectives 
= Le 
«Land ofien left fallow due to absentes landlordism. Need appropriate legislation to ensure 
both ownership rights of landowners and security of tenure of cultivators and allow fallow 
land to be brought into use. 
¢ Develop Master Water Management Plan involving all relevant ministries: with proper water 
resource management (¢.g., rubber dams to prevent saltwater intrusion, sluice gate system 
to control flood waters, increasing surface water irrigation). 
* Adopt adaptive research plan for demonstration and uptake of high value nutritionally rich 
horticulture crops available with agricultural universities 
« Promote biosafety research to develop biotic stress and pest and disease tolerant varicties 
«Promote fast-growing vegetable crops that can be harvested in | to 1.5 months in areas prone 
to climate vulnerabilities like flash floods 
«Local hybrid seed varieties have to be developed of high value horticulture crops in demand 
fe.g.,capsicum and broccoli), for promotion at scale 
¢ Develop strategy for adoption at scale of biofortified rice varieties that have been developed 
¢ Hill area livelihoods, agriculture, livestock and fishery need special attention 
«Livestock production and distribution plan: stress tolerant livestock breeds have to be 
screened and improved breeds developed, conserved and promoted. The use of livestock 
germplasm that has come in illegally and is not covered under the Livestock Development 
Policy, 2007 has to be prevented. 
¢Promote regiona) germplasm banks for livestock, poultry, fodder,to enable sustainable 
production in different geographies 
e Ensure livestock vaccination 
¢ Blue Economy: declare 10-20% of the 3500 perennial fakes out of the total 6300 lakes fi.c, 
2800 seasonal) in the Haor region as permanent sanctuaries 
* Strengthen MoFL,; take actions on issucs like seafood processing technology, validation and 
safety; plan for data generation and conduct more research; promote non-conventional food 
items such as seaweed 
«Promote capture fishery 
e Establish testing facilities to test aflatoxin levels, AMR and other required parameters at 
district level, for both crop and animal produce, to ensure food safety and also comply with 
export requirements 
«Develop production for export through contract farming 
« Responsibility of research and extension with the universities should be clearly spelt out and 
adequate research budget made available 
«Promote micro seed vendors in remote areas like CHT 
* Promotion of agricultural diversification is required for Khasia punji 
 
 
1. 
To 
ensure 
the 
availability 
of 
safe 
and 
nutritious 
food 
for 
healthy 
diets 
 
 
|] 194

1. 
To 
ensure 
the 
availability 
of 
safe 
and 
nutritious 
food 
for 
healthy 
dicts 
 
Rajshahi-Rangpur 
«Increase dairy production in all cight districts of Rajshahi division by setting up collection 
centres and chiiling plants and ensuring remunerative prices: 
e Ensure stable price for egg and chicken for small poultry farmers 
e Create awareness and support poultry farmers to get their produce certified and tested 
e Develop online market for livestock meat products 
¢ Promote nutrient rich fish species and small indigenous species farming 
ePromote zone-specific low-cost technologies and household based integrated farming 
approaches 
¢Incresse knowledge of nutrition among extension personne! 
einvest to create permanent infrastructures in area-specific small tnmigation and water 
conservation 
eHamess ICT and prepare mobile database information on land area, imgation, crop 
production ete. for effective extension and planned growth 
eLand Use Planning is required 
¢ Microcredit should be extended for longer period of time 
¢ Ensure good quality inputs (sced, fertilizer, pesticides) 
e Have arca-specific aquaculture promotion programme 
* Monitor quality of feed for livestock and fish 
eExtension should promote safe food production technologies available with agriculture 
research institutes 
¢ Develop location-specific technologies and varieties, to encourage crop diversification 
« Promote nutrient-rich vegetable varieties available with BARI 
* Ensure stable feed price for dairy farmers and establish chilling plants in production area to 
preserve dairy produce 
¢ Promote smaller fruit trees under horticulture, to enhance productivity 
¢ Promote rooftop gardening 
e Bridge gap between DoL and universities and promote available natural growth promoters 
and antibiotic replacers at field level, to promote chemical free safe food production 
« Encourage consumption of maize as food, to incentivize production 
«Promote conservation agriculture 
«Collateral free loan should be available to all farmers 
¢ Extend irrigation water availability to char arca 
e Ensure fodder, animal feed and food safety 
e Ensure availability of land for grazing of cattle 
¢ Stop import of onion and garlic for 4 months from harvesting period 
 ¢ Promote biopcsticides to replace chemical pesticides 
* Promote water management through rainwater harvesting, surface water conservation, avoid 
salt water intrusion and prevent flooding 
e Revisit and promote traditional methods of water conservation 
«Promote crops other than paddy that grow in saline and waterlogged conditions 
* Promote salinity tolerant fodder crops. 
* Promote production of dairy by-products. 
e Ensure stable feed cost for dairy farmers 
¢ Promote zero tillage cultivation to increase production 
e Promote floating agriculture 
* Promote Sorjan system of Integrated fish farming 
¢ Mcchanisation to suit small farmer needs 
¢ Harness ICT to provide need-based information to farmers 
«Create awareness and promote crop insurance 
* Popularise cultivation of mustard and sunflower oilseeds 
e Promote cultivation of winter vegetables 
¢Demonstrate Model Integrated Homestead Farming - fish-livestock-veg with training on 
nutrition; replace raintree with fruit trees on homesteads 
e Promote proper land use and crop planning 
«Promote quinoa as a nutrient-dense crop and develop its value chain 
« Promote production of indigenous foods 
es 195 |

¢Prioritise which crops should be promoted, which approach, with responsibility and time 
frame 
*Build capacity of university system through advanced technology traming in advanced 
breeding techniques; gone cditing; speed breeding: nanotechnology 
« Encoursge international coordination for research and university-research institute-private 
sector collaboration 
* Encourage research on ethnic food crops and underutilised crops - reservoir of genes 
«Forests are 4 storehouse of uncultivated crop yaricties - germplasm collection and 
conservation are crucial - participatory conservation, 
* Ban use of industry and arsenic polluted water for irrigation 
«Promote balanced fertiliser application 
« Establish laboratory testing facility for testing nutrient content in plants 
¢ Promote intercropping of green leafy vegetables and pulses with cotton; cottonseed - source 
of edible oil, fuel and fodder/feed for livestock and fish 
* Attention to soil health and policy to prevent soil contamination 
: Use ICT for effective nutrient application 
a 
 
eCrossbreed with indigenous livestock breeds to increase production 
«Strengthen extension to reach research findings to farmers 
# Recycle biological waste at houschold and industry level, for feed and biofertilisers 
* Promote aquaponics in roofiop gardening. 
* Policy to promote biofortified crop varieties 
« Conserve and promote small indigenous fishes nch in micronutrients 
eIntroduce climate-smart agriculture using appropriate genotype varicties for higher 
production, good quality grain and reduce cost of production in disaster prone areas 
«Follow integrated Plant Nutrient System approach basing fertiliser application on soil health 
Develop Market Integration and Market information Systems to ensure farmers get 
competitive prices and awareness is created amongst them 
1, To ensure the availability of safe and nutritious food for healthy diets 
 
 
|) 196

2. 
To 
ensure 
access 
to 
safe 
and 
nutritious 
food 
at 
an 
affordable 
price 
 Chattogram-Sylhet 
| ¢GoB should purchase farmers" crops advance or provide at least three months loan in the 
 
crop harvesting season so that farmers can keep their rice and sell ata higher price, instead 
of resorting to distress sale to repay debts 
e Establish farmers' market centres 
«DAM should provide price projection on daily basis 
* Establish laboratory testing facilities at district level 
¢ Small scale cold storage facilities should be established at local level! 
* Need for periodically reviewing food prices across urban areas 
«Capacity development and adaptive financing of value chain actors 
* Promote cooperative marketing and storage infrastructure for year-round availability 
Raj 
® Ensure adequate transport facility to reduce damage and loss of nutrients during transit 
® Legally stipulate at city corporation level the form in which products may enter markets 
¢ Dredge rivers to enable transportation of food items 
Upgrade Rajshahi Airport to international standard and declare as international sirport to 
increase export to neighbouring countries 
* Efficient use of the land port of Panchagarh for export to India, Nepal, and Bhutan 
«Construct feeder roads to improve access 
* Promote local storage facilities including for potatoes 
* Special attention to transport facilities in char areas to enable transport of produce to market 
eIntroduce "Climate Service" at farmers' level. Disseminate information of weekly 
forecasting to farmers 
¢ Local government institutions should be more involved and accountable to establish markets 
and ensure accessibility 
eSupport marginalized women in business 
* Make infrastructure women-iriendly. 
¢ Establish postharvest processing facilities for vegetables 
«Promote and disseminate nutrition messages to vegetable yendors, vegetable shops, markets 
#Need export processing zones for potato to enable and promote disease free exports 
* Scale up and promote processing of local fruits like mango and litehi 
 Barishal-Khulna 
 « Establish an Organic Produce Comer in all markets under the Food Department 
* Establish more growth centres run by farmers' organisations 
* Reduce the role of middlemen in FVC 
«Promote farmer level training for effective technology transfer 
*Promote SBCC on safe food 
* Require small- and large-scale preservation and processing industry to reduce the post- 
harvest loss, e.g., for guava and amra in the south 
¢ Train households on preservation and processing through sustainable technologies 
« Address antibioticuse in the shrimp cultivation which leaves residue 
* Provide vans and pickup trucks to fishermen 
¢ Increase vegetable production and availability of local food items to enhance food diversity 
in the coastal regions 
*Promote technologies developed by universityies for different fruit leather (mango, 
watermelon, tamarind) 
Promote beekeeping as a profitable venture 
es 197 5 |

[Objective | Region | Suggested Actions « Promote biodegradable packaging 
«Promote farmer producer organisations/cooperatives 
«Promote cooperative value chain development 
«Focus on postharvest low-cost technologies to retain nutrient content 
«Strengthen Trading Corporation of Bangladesh 
« Adress micronutrient loss in food 
* Give attention to the packaging sector and modemize storage facilities 
eSupport for research requirements to study and reduce food waste 
«Fund research to understand food hazards in both plant and animal foods. Develop a 
national Health Risk Index that can be referred to 
e Chilling and freezing facilities for both storage and transport have to be increased to 
prevent losses occurring during transport of fish 
«Generate employment for youth by developing agriculture machinery service providers 
| «Develop cotton crop as a commercial crop to improve economic food access 
 2.To ensure access to safe and 
nutritious food at an affordable 
price 
 
 * Monitor nutrient-dense supplementary food for babies 
«Carry out awareness campaigns on nutrient quality, labeling, and nutritional benefits 
¢ Consider how availability and use of ethnic foods of tribal communities can contribute to: 
dietary diversity 
* Build awareness among tribals on dietary diversity, safe food preparation and hygienio 
practices 
e Consider issues of water availability in hill areas and ensure safe water supply to tribal 
communities. 
«Promote local lentils to meet the protein and micronutrient requirements of the tribal 
populations and those in coastal regions who may not be able to afford and consume animal 
source foods like meat and fish. 
«Consider local culture and food behavioural practices and create awareness on the nutritional 
benefit of the local foods for improved diets and nutrition in these communities 
« Address water availability and hardness in offshore islands 
«Combine agriculture, nutrition, and women empowerment components in family-based 
training activities and include both the husband and wife as participants in the programme, 
*include micronutrient fortified foods including fortified nce 
«include males as targets of adolescent nutrition training programmes 
* Nutrition education programmes should include males, mothers-in-law, and other family 
members as participants 
| eFCT updating 
 
 
|) 198

es 199 0 | 
* Promote cooking guidelines including use of appropriate utensils in a practical way for use 
by the wider population. 
© Dissemination and promotion of FCT and dietary guidelines at field level 
«Promote local foods available including fruits among the communities ¢.g,Santhals 
* Need to have region specific food lists and develop local recipes, 
* Utilization of local fruits should be promoted through appropriate processing e.g,,saleda, 
jackfruit, woodapple 
* Promote immunity 'building foods'; foods for infection control; ensure dietary diversity e.g, 
fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, protein rich foods 
¢ Emphasize the role of micronutrients in the dict: their role in cognitive functions; zinc,andiron, 
folate as immunity building foods. 
¢ Special attention to nutritional needs of elderly, most affected during COVID -19 
* Promote local CF for young children ,using available ingredients. 
¢ Promote therapeutic foods using local ingredicnts for MAM and SAM cases too, in addition 
to national health protocols. 
«Give consideration to Women's empowerment, ensure their role in decision making 
* Promote food-based approaches in a clear, practical and integrated way. 
* Promote age-specific dietary guidelines through school-based nutrition education 
* Promote healthy cooking practices through mass media 
«Consider floating populations, homeless, beggars - while disseminating NE messages 
elssues of family planning, small family norms should be included in nutrition Aols 
«Provide safe foods at affordable prices by establishing safe vegetables and fruits markets 
¢ Promote nutritionally rich perennial trees under homestead gardening 
 
«Establish and enforce garbage disposal systems aligning with existing government policies/ 
guidelines/ documents, 
* Food consumption data needs to be collected to measure dietary diversity and to analyze the 
nulrient gaps. 
* Promotion of NUS marine fishes which are good source of omega-3 fatty acids and iodine to 
enhance consumption need to be emphasized. 
¢ Dissemination of FCT and dietary guidelines at field level 
¢ Discuss nutrition needs of elderly. | 
«In coastal region, male participation in childcare is very low, SBCC should focus on gender 
issues and consider the sensitivity of enhancing male participation to support childcare 
Identify the basic needs region-wise such as char, haor, coastal areas 
eTV cooking shows can promote appropriate cooking methods, and nutrient-dense recipes with 
nutritive value explained, to enhance healthy consumption. 
«Promote consumption of local fruits and vegetables 
« Promote processing and cooking methods that retain bioavailability of nutrients 
«Target children from primary schoo! level and promote dietary guidelines 
«Involve District Information Officer to disseminate FBDG 
e Arrange awareness campaigns, seminars, mass media activities and development of social 
media tools (ic. YouTube videos) to disseminate dietary guidelines at grassroot level 
e Include key food list with various seasonal foods and age-specific menu planning 
mofood website so that mass population van access this information and improve their dict. 
« There is need for nutrient gap analysis based on recent HIES. 
e Increase dictary diversification to improve nutrition adequacy 
*Identify/ promote fruits/ veg with health promoting properties like polyphenols 
«Enhance commercial fruits gardening to produce year-round nutrition-dense fruits.

* FNS awareness should be included in the schoo) text curriculum 
« Sensitize students on agriculture production process and value addition 
« Update guidelines for improving food habits, disseminate Nationa! Dietary guidelines 
* Assessments carried oul by BNNC on COVID -19 impacts on FNS need to be reviewed and 
the results should inform the actions under nutrition and related Aols of the PoA 
« Disseminate nutrition awareness based on findings of research study on nutrient density and 
affordability of habitual and desirable diets by lifecycle stage, region, and vulnerable groups 
¢ Promote immunity boosting foods, neglected underutilized species,and local foods 
» Digitalize and promote information on the nutritive value of local foods, safe food 
preparation, appropriate cooking techniques through TV shows and media outreach. 
e Involve mothers of students in school-based nutrition education and awareness programmes. 
¢ Promote nutrition awareness at houschold level, especially on safe food processing, 
preparation, and consumption of healthy diet. 
«Recruit nutritionists at district level and involve them to create nutrition awareness 
«Promote School-based nutrition education programme on diet and hygiene 
« Disseminate nutrition messages in school management committee meeting and parents. 
-teachers meeting. 
¢ Target mothers to promote nutrient-dense recipes and appropriate cooking practices 
« Introduce training program for spouses on nutrition aspects. 
e Provide training to women and other household members on nutrition aspects to break social 
taboos and cultural barriers. 
«Promote processed fish for consumption and its other uses such as fish meal, and medicinal oil 
« Promote bran rice/ unpolished rice 
«Promote stevia as sugar substitute 
«Develop Health Risk Index for every food to ensure safe and nutritious food. 
Dhaka- 
 
 
bo & 5 * Develop accurate carly warning system to enable proper pre-disaster action, 
: 5 $ FI circulating pre-preparedness to protect human security and for storage of required 
5 ow emergency food. 
Ee ' 2 Ey «Maintain 1.05 million metric tons as buffer stock all-round the year 
S oe * Provide Ahadya bandhob programme in urban areas to support the urban poor. 
| d Es 2 : «Emphasize on accurate data on population and production for planning SSNPs - develop 
3S | } single registry system and avoid duplication and mistargeting. 
F Z au *FFW, Rural Infrastructure Development, VGF, EGPP, GR etc,and SSNPs which are basically 
ga e kind transfer programmes that have been converted into cash transfer. So, it is needed to 
i £is include these beneficiaries under the FFP and OMS, =: 2 5 «Increase the procurement centres and purchase from large rural markets 
IF & a s * Necd for real time proper monitoring to measure the effect of distributed fortified rice. 
* «Fix procurement price of paddy and wheat in advance 
|) 200

4. To increase access to nutrition-sensitive social protection and safety nets across lifecycle with a focus on 
vulnerable groups and regions 
 
Rajshahi-Rangpur 
. safety net programmes should have necessary nutrition focus 
 
© Begin emergency food bank where the rich people donate food grain that can be utilized to 
mitigate emergency shocks and disaster. 
* Activate community-based storage facilities by involving the locally elected body. 
* Start SSNPs support for slum people m urban areas. 
«Expand and strengthen food fortification under the SSNPs. 
«Provide a nutrition sensitive package under the SSNPs for nutritionally vulnerable people. 
e Ensure fair price and pnce support to marginal farmers during the crisis penod. 
* Assess requirement of emergency stock for round the year availability, for managing internal 
and external procurement. 
* Have a buffer stock of more than 1.05 million MT because population size has increased 
* Need research work to link all safety net programmes. 
* External procurement is required to respond at the time of crisis and emergency. 
® Research and evaluation on impact of food friendly programme (FFP) and vulnerable group 
development (VGD) programme is required 
« Add lentils as source of protein with fortified rice for distribution in FFP 
«Price contro! of rice is required. 
«Scale up distribution of fortified rice 
e Provide farmer's card to vive price incentive to the fanmers through foodgrain procurement. 
 -Khulna 
 
e Repackaging of fortified rice from 50kg/sack to 30 kg/sack 
e Fish can be included as part of the food package in PFDS 
« Arrange training for alternative income generating activities (AIGAs) for landless. and for 
community who live in floating boat and extend SSNs for them, 
© Need special support for landless and vulnerable MUNDA community through SSNPs. 
¢ Enhance the coverage and extend the duration of VGF programme for fishermen during the 
ban period of fishing. 
«Organize AIGAS training for fishermen during lean season and vulnerable communities 
(e.g., Bede), to create employment. 
e Ensure and validate the food grain production data and assess stock accordingly 
e Ensure beneficiary selection process unbiasedly under the SSNPs. 
«Increase coverage (number of upazilla) for distribution of fortified rice (Pushti Chal) 
¢ Increase the number of VGD card for the fishermen community. 
e Enhance the coverage of SSNPs 
* Arrange training for AIGAs for rural women and young people such as vermi compost 
production, commercial flower production 
¢ Prepare list of farmers appropriately to provide price incentives to the real farmers 
«Sclect vulnerable people under the SSNPs transparently. 
e Conduct research to identify micronutrient deficiency level and areas to prepare distribution 
plan for fortified rice and micronutrient enriched biscuits, in disaster-prone areas 
* Distribute VGF benefits:to the beneficiaries through digital financial services;to reach 
the actual beneficiaries 
ee 201 |

Sugeested Actions 
e Interlink microfinance institution and microcredit programmes with social safety nets 
¢ Strictly monitor the PDFS (procurement, distribution, stock) through digital system 
* Procure non-cereal nutritive food stuffs (pulses, potatoes, vegetables) at village level and 
establish food hubs (working station) at subnational or union level to store the procured 
food. Later, transfer the food from food hubs to shortage areas. 
* Introduce crop and livestock insurance to support the vulnerable groups at field level 
through piloting for customization the insurance system. 
e Expand the budget allocation for SSNPs from 17% to 25%. 
¢ Besides jottery system in the 'Krishoker Apps' to procure food grain from the farmers, 
increase the number of farmers to purchase food grain directly. 
¢ Continue school feeding programme during the COVID-19 period 
e Expand and strengthen the food fortification programmes. 
«Prepare vulnerability index as pre-disaster strategy. 
«Stop the selection bias and leakage for proper implementation the SSNPs at local level 
introducing transparent method for beneficiary selection, 
¢ Adeguate preparedness to provide incentives through instant responses to any kind of disaster, 
including heat wave that affects crops, by selecting beneficiaries unbiasedly 
e Strengthen the early warming system by coordinating with SPARRSO, DAE and DLS and 
provide major responsibilityto the DAE, 
«Introduce crop insurance to mitigate vulnerability 
e Strengthen the coordination between MoA and MoFood to mitigate food crisis and 
ensure food security for the vulnerable people 
e Improve data deficiency for efficiently managing the PFDS, market and price volatility 
of non-grain food 
« Need to apply integrated approach to reach vulnerable people in disaster prone areas by 
unbiasedly selecting the beneficiaries of SSNPs. 4, 
To 
increase 
access 
to 
nutrition-sensitive 
social 
protection 
and 
safety 
= 
nets 
across 
lifecycle 
with 
a focus 
on 
vulnerable 
groups 
and 
regions 
=| 
Dhaka-Mymensingh 
 
Objective | Region Suggested Actions 
« Action Plan has to be supported by investment plan for operationalisation 
« Strengthen the governance mechanism for FNS 
¢ Strengthen the Bangladesh Competition Commission to ensure affordable price 
* National Food Pricing Policy is required and should be monitored 
e Establish apex body for capacity development at upazila level 
e Strengthen nutrition focus across all ministries and improve inter-séctoral collaboration. 
¢ Have regular UNCC, DNCC and district-level meetings 
«Create awareness among the consumers about food safety and how they can submit 
grievances for redressal and remedial actions 
«Strengthen the capacities to monitor food adulteration. 
«Develop Taskforce (9 ensure regular monitoring of production distribution, 
« Conduct quality research on a routine and systematic basis 
+ Continuous Professional Development training can be included 
¢ Collect food consumption data penodically (i.c,,bascline, mid-term etc.), ensure accuracy 
of data collection and produce a baseline database 
«Conduct more RCTs and accommodate all the findings for evidence-based policy making 
¢ Develop central and regional data management systems 
*Recycle biodegradable houschold waste as an organic fertilizer/nutrient for minimizing 
environmental degradation as well ag enhancing the livelihood security of locals 
¢ Increase number of fish landing centres in the coastal area for minimizing the loss of fish 
products and improvement in the quality of seafood 
«BIHS data needs to be included as a rich source of data on agriculture, dictary intake, 
anthropomeiry, women empowerment and safety nets 
«Ensure waste segregation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste and recycling so 
that it does not go into the environment and mix with the food chain. 
 
effective 
policy 
implementation 
Chattogram-Sythet 
5. To strengthen cross-sectoral food and nutrition security. 
governance, coordination, capacity building and partnership for 
 
 
|) 202

capacity 
building 
and 
partnership 
for effective 
fz 
 5. 
To 
tre 
 Rajshahi-Rangpur 
¢ Promote holistic approach at the ground level with intsgration between the three extension | 
departments (Ag-Liyestock-Fisheries) for addressing nutrition effectively at the household 
level. This has to be endorsed at the Ministerial level for rollout. 
* Need for separate ministry for food processing 
« More research on Big data. 
® Strengthen mobile court to regulate use of antibiotics (i.c.,in poultry) and pesticides 
* More communication, coordination between MoLGRD and DAM is required 
* Conduct survey in collaboration with BBS to monitor policy implementation 
® National nutrition survey is required every 2 years 
«Appropriate measures/legislation required to prevent loss of nutrient content in rice during 
de-husking and polishing 
« Ensure safe food preparation in restaurants and street food stalls 
'Khulna 
«Bangladesh largely depends on upper riparian countries for surface water 
® Food, Nutrition and Agriculture should be under one Ministry for effective delivery 
* Set up National Data Center for staple foods 
® BBS and DAE data are not harmonized, require coordination and harmonization 
* Capacity strengthening of BST; certification by BST] should be recognized in export 
markets and certification of imported items should be accelerated 
* Establish BSTI certified labs in cach district for testing quality of produce 
# Sale of pesticides/insecticides should be against prescription and purchased from licensed 
sellers only. DAE can be empowcred to issue prescriptions 
«Update data on postharvest loss at university level 
Dhaka-Mymensingh 
 
«Implement GAP, GAgP, and GHP 
* Food safety management should be coordinated by BFSA. 
* Enhance linkages of Food Safety Officers with local intersectoral departments 
® Develop 2 national policy for reducing FLW 
«Examine how the waste can be recycled - e.g2,,houschold waste can be used to create 
biocompost; mature technologies to be taken up and promoted by GO/NGOs, 
«Enforce Food Safety policies; create awareness 
«The 4th Industrial Revolution has been acknowledged by GoB and should be reflected in 
the PoA. The Ag dept is taking it up as a priority programme. Includes AI, block chain 
management and data management systems 
«Conduct annual Central Food Fair/Innovation Mela where technologies can be exhibited 
and a few potential ones identified for piloting at the field level. 
« Develop mechanisms to attract private sector investment 
* Facilitate research on postharvest losses with regard to livestock, poultry and fish 
*In sddition to BARI, include other research institutions and universities in development of 
nutrient-rich crop varieties and provide support for research 
e Bring universities under NARS and ensure support for research 
¢ Ensure strong collaboration between BARI, BRRI and BINA 
* The Cotton Board is engaged in a sustainable cotton initiative, using software to advise 
farmers on use of inputs and linking farmers with the end user through a QR code, A 
similar initiative can be adopted for food crops 
* Create agency for quality certification/organic produce certification/GAP certification 
Include energy conversion of food waste as part of circular economy approach 
Increase priority to livestock 
«Promote Internet of Things (loT) - use for a variety of purposes in agriculture 
» Generate Awareness through TV and media to reduce FLW 
203 8 |

Annex 3. Comments from the Thematic Team and Stakeholder Consultations by Objective 
 
 
 
Objective Suggested Actions 
* Increased effort for making food ayailable and affordable 
cs ¢ Emphasize on the plant-based protein,and fisheries too apart from livestock 
< e Increase the stock of natural source fishes 
£ e The land use policy should include availability of land for salt production 
¢ Study forward and backward linkages in salt production chain to ensure sustainable 
= production and distribution of iodised salt 
E e Address problem of water salinity 
: ¢ In coastal areas where there are polders, excavate canals for fresh water flow 
= * Encourage farmers to grow salt tolerant varieties that are available 
= e Ensure effective water management which is often the issue rather than availability 
: e Motivate youth to engage in agriculture; we need partnerships 
= e Bring more land under cultivation in the haor region, with proper water management. A lot 
es of land is left fallow in the Sylhet region that can be brought under cultivation. 
5 e Focus on increasing farmer income and employment in order to improve consumer aceess 
2 * Promote crops other than rice and cropping intensity in fallow land, Barind tract and 
& highlands 
? ¢ Promote vegetables and short duration climate resilient cereal crops like millets 
= ¢ Short duration crop varieties can be promoted in rice fallow and as intercrop with nce 
= ¢ Promote farming system approach that combines multiple crops, livestock, poultry 
5 e Use of insecticides should be in the nght proportion - following GAP 
& * Address soil crosion especially in hill areas and soil acidification in north Bangladesh 
= e Measure heavy metal content in soil and adulteration in fertilisers 
¢ Promote family nutrition gardens on homestead land 
: ¢ Increase awareness on GAP policy, agriculture mechanization policy 
s e Promote sorghum and millets in char lands 
e e Establish gene bank to conserve indigenous fish yarieties 
a e Natural resource management measures should take into account ensuring access to jheels 
and common waterbodies for fishing to fish farmers and social equity issues addressed 
2 ¢ Require a software for Upazila Food Godown, for maintaining stocks 
q ® Demand estimation of varieties of food based on geographic locations 
3 e Require more demand-based training 
= e Ensure credit for the ultra-poor people 
= e Increase the social equity for the fishing or natural habitats Improve the 
3 transportation system (like special train for mangoes put in place end of May 2021) 
3 ¢ Need software for public disclosure of market price information 
& * Need more cooperatives like Milk Vita 
= * Information, education and communication materials for agro-food is required 
= * Focus.on rural development 
By e Improve access to market for hill and remote areas and ethnic groups 
= = * Diversified income sources should be promoted particularly for agriculture labour 
5 ¢ Promote low cost solar dricrs for preserving winter vegetables 
2 ® Support salt producers with new technology to undertake production in an environmentally 
& sustainable manner with duc attention to quality, and also to increase productivity 
- * Develop a policy for dissemination of biofortified rice varicties and a marketing strategy in 
g association with nce mills 
g Market infrastructure has to be improved at union level 
P Update National Cooperative Policy 2012 
. Promote the hygienic production and processing of date palm molassses (khejur gur) with 
. improved technology. Khejur gur can be widely used as a source of energy/ minerals 
be 
" 
|] 204

life cycle with a focus on vulnerable 
4. To increase access to nutrition-sensitive | 
social protection and safety nets across 
groups 
and 
regions *e 
® 
Suggested Actions 
Consider all essential foods and nutrients based on nutritional requirements according to 
lifespan categories 
Door to door household surveys are required to assess the nutritional demand 
Nutrition planning across all levels is required to meet nutricnt targets of policies & plans 
Regional, district, upazila nutrition situation/profile are needed to determine nutritional 
demand and nutrition planning 
Influence of changes in income, social economic status, and urbanization on food choices 
and consumption, needs to be considered for food and nutrition planning 
Desirable intake needs to be calculated based on body weight and height 
There is need for coordination among the training institutes under DLS and DoF and 
among the research institutions 
Accelerate initiatives for eliminating water scarcity 
Enhance extension activities to promote locally produced foods (.g., jute leaves (pat sak) 
which is a micronutrient rich leafy vegetable) through DAE, RDCD and other sectors of 
the government. Action research needs to be carried out on these issues 
Three jute varieties have been developed whose jeaves are richer in nutrient content (iron, 
calcium and vitamins) than spinach. This knowledge has to be disseminated 
Carry out mass nutrition training on balanced dicts and dietary guidelines especially 
simplifying it for the understanding and application of daily-wage labourers 
Strengthen coordinated mechanisms for traming across the country at grassroot level 
Awareness has to be generated on cooking methods without loss of nutrients 
In hill areas, address low consumption of animal food 
Central Aid Management System (CAMS) software has been developed for food aid in 
Bangladesh under the Department of Disaster Management (DDM),which can be widely 
used 
Add nutrition, energy dense and allergy free rice-based biscuit and cake that have been 
innovated by BRRI through NATP Phase 2 research under the school feeding program 
Ensure fair price far CHT food products 
Develop and support low-cost food grain preservation systems for CHT population 
Increasé the number of food grain procurement centres and involve local entrepreneurs in 
food grain procurement through union digital centres 
Apply the 'Krishoker App' procurement tool nationwide for efficiently managing the food 
grain procurement system 
Modernize, increase and improve the storage capacity to maintain food grain quality 
Improve the data system on social safety net programs through Agricultural Wing of BBS. 
Involve union level relief officers in policy making. They effectively handled disbursement 
of COVID-19 covid relief measures 
Improve data management to ensure instant svailability of information on food stocks 
oral food and 
 
 
nutrition 
security 
governance, 
 
 §. 
To 
strengthen 
 
Food testing facilities should be increased 
Reduce food loss m the food value chain 
Emphasize safe food production and enhance safe food supply chain to preserve nutritive 
value of foods and vegetables 
Promote collaboration between crop research institutes (c.g.,rice, sugarcane, cotton), to 
arrive at what can be grown between crops | 
Increase awareness on GAP policy, agriculture mechanization policy 
Require different policy for vulnerable and geographically challenged arcas 
Inter-ministerial collaboration is required to address issucs at the ground level 
Promote and adopt sanitary and phytosanitary measures for safe food production to 
promote exports 
Ensure permanent employment for staff trained in food testing 
Apiculture and beekeeping should be promoted and their biodiversity conserved 
Match ecological advantage with crop system planning 
Conserve traditional crop varieties 
Monitor use of growth regulators 
es 205 0 |

Annex 4, List of Areas of Intervention by NFNSP Strategy and Objective 
 
BO ee isms Ce om lise ChB Cm oli tml. o | 
 
 
 
Strategy Area of Intervention 
1.1.1. Develop improved climate-smart technologies for productivity gains, agricultural diversification, 
sustainable intensification, and enhancement of nutricnt-content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
markets 
 
 
2 | 1.1.2. Disseminate improved technologies and practices at farmer and farm level through offective and 
participatory extension services 
3 | 1.1.3. Expand and promote the use of water-efficient and environmentally friendly altemative irrigation 
Stratesy:\1!) Mnerease technologies, including surface irrigation 
productivity while 4 1.14, Improve timely access to credit including micro-credit, to small-scale producers through suitable 
cnsuring sustainable institutional reforms 
production of cereals | 5 | 1.15, Improve input use efficiency for productivity gains, sustainability, and health and environmental 
and nutritious food protection 
including 6 | 1.1.6, Promote the production of quality feed and fodder through sppropriste support to feed and fodder 
horticulture, fisheries industries for fisheries and livestock 
& livestock 7 | 1.1.7. Stimulate the blue economy by promoting the sustainable development of marine fisheries and 
aquaculture in coordination with other non-sgricultural uses and the private sector 
8 | 1.1.8. Develop and promote eco-friendly and responsible practices for animal health along the principles 
of "One Health" 
9 | 1.1.9. Strengthen the role of POs and cooperatives to reduce the cost of production, improve market access, 
und increasing the prices received by producers 
10) 1.2.1 Promote diversification into horticulture, fisheries, livestock, poultry and dairy products with high 
Strategy 12 Scale up nutrient and micronutrient content including regional and ethnic foods 
eee NS 11} 1.2.2. Increase funding and improve efficiency of R&D for sustainable agriculture 
food production 12] 1.2.3. Improve the availability of safe nutritious food through innovation and expansion of appropriate 
methods of urban-based food production 
13| 2.1.1. Promote the establishment, improvement and management of post-harvest marketing 
infrastructure and processing facilities for horticultural products, pulses and legumes, livestock and 
Strategy 2.1 Improve || Bsheries : - : market access and 14] 2.1.2. Set up financial intermediation services with improved access to credit for agro-processors along 
Stabilize food markets with other complementary services 
15] 2.1.3. Maintain an orderly market management by securing property rights, regulating competition and 
stabilizing prices 
16| 2.1.4. Ensure trade liberalisation and facilitation to support the supply of quality food at all times 
17| 2.2.1. Stimulate innovation-led efficiency gains in FVC by shortening the chain, improving cooperation 
among agents and by reducing food losses and waste 
Strutegy 2.2 Improve |18| 2.2.2. Encourage and support the establishment and growth of financially viable MSMEs 
value chain and 19] 2.2.3. Create an enabling environment to attract private investment in infrastructure, processing, value 
marketing systems addition, marketing and climinate business barriers 
20| 2.2.4. Promote inclusive cooperative/group-based processing and marketing 
21| 2.2.5. Strengthen ICT-based market information system to provide real time support to farmers. 
22] 2.3.1. Preserve and promote food safety and nutrients along the value chain including during 
transportation, processing, packaging, storage, wholesale und retuil 
Strategy 2.3 Preserve |23)| 2.3.2. Promote the fortification and nutrition enhancement of relevant foods where desirable and 
and enhance nutrient efficient 
content along the | 24] 2.3.3. Promote innovation and developmenit of appropriate technologies to preserve nutritional value, in 
value chain local and export processing zones (EPZ), including under Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
25| 2.3.4, Build the capacity of the private scctor to test food and communicate results to and engage with 
value chain actors for adequate remedial actions, and establish food traceability mechanisms 
26| 2.4.1. Expand and promote agriculture-driven, off-farm employment and other employment along the 
s 2.4 Raise ioe: au vocational training opportunities particularly for rural youth, women and 
saree OF Be poet 27| 2.4.2. Provide adequate credit, technology, information, training and other related services for the 
growth of agro-based industries and the broader rural non-farm economy, with special emphasis on the 
most vulncrable sections of the population 
Strategy 3,1 Improve | 28) 3.1.1. Develop a national-level food production, supply and consumption plan based on 2 nutrient gap 
market access and analysis considering energy and nutrient demand for a healthy and active life 
stabilize food 29| 3.1.2. Support the implementation of DDP plans for a healthy and sustainable food system 
 
| | 206

Strategy Area of Intervention 
 
 we etree - toes mere 
3.1.3, Expond human resources and etrengther instiqotional arrangements to improve performance of 
munition services with special emphasis on fick! ive) 
3.2.1 Devebop and promote focal foods, healthy cooking and food combinations, eafe storage including 
knowledge on nutrient labelling 
3.2.2, Scale-up integrated nutrition education strategicn to enhance consumption of healthy, dicts, 
increase awareness of the mutrient composition of loca! foods-az:- well a3 to prowent and control 
malnutrition (andernutriton md overnutrition) 
 
3.3.1, Expend programa for immunization, control af ARI, prevention of chofera and diarrhocu) diseayet 
 
3.3.2. Strengthen the implementation of NNS delivery integrated with cocmmunity clinics targeting 
children and women suffering from persistest weakness aod micromutrient definiensics 
 
33,3. Scale up the supply of safe weater for coasumption and domestic use 
 
3.3.4_ improve sanituty focilities and bygieme practices, ittcluding the prevention of wnimal to humus 
trurnsmision of dixeztc and prevention and control of food and waters bore aliness 
 
al 
- 
= x e =) <I J 
S 
4it. lntorm decision-making and improve planning for price support to farmers, market atabilizetion 
and pablic food diatribation 
4.1.2, Enhance the management of procurement, public food stocks and prices stabilization activities and 
implement a nutrition sensitive PFDS 
4.1.3, Bnnuve adequate staruge of food grain muintaining quadity and prevent deterioration of sered 
foodxtufls it the PPDS 
 
40 4.2.1, Increase the resilience of agriculture systems through various mechanisme notably climate-smart 
technologies, adoption of stres3-tolerant crop varieties and imptementelzon of pood agricultury, animal 
hosbandry and fisheries practices forthe production of healthy foods 
14 4.2.2, locrosae the disaster-copmg ability of poor farming familics, support home-bosed fnrming 
espodially through "Amer Bari Amur KhamarTM (My Home My Farrn), and protect poultry, livestock and 
other aanets 
42 4.2.3, Ensure operation of emergency shelters with nutrifious and safe food, safe drinking water, 
sanitation and bealthcure for disasteralfected people, expecially for women, elderty, disabled and 
children 
a3 42.4. Facilitate and coordinate disaster response, mitigation and rehabilitation through timely and 
strategic stornyge of public food stuck, rapid distrsution to dinaster-affected peaple, and effective 
mobitization through various modalities inchiding public-private partnerships 
a 
= I 
a 
a = s 
al 
= 3 4 s 
| os 
Ei oa a aos 
I 
x - 
eo) 
= ej » 
bi 
a = eI = b= = 
8 e = cd a 
BS a 
-s 
fy wv 
> 
n ~ 
be | a 
= & 

rad 
4.3.1. Strengthen gocial protection in dissdvantaged areas und for disadvantaged groups 
43,2 Ensure anfety nota ing the poorest and matnbonally vulnershle, expecially fernale-headed. 
houscholds, during periods of seasonal criscs.and food shortages 
433, Develop and implement nutritive -eceuwitive cock protection progrums, inctuding food 
fortification, nutrition education, aud behaviour change communications 
4.3.4, Ensure proper coordinative and co-operation to inteyrite social protection with agriculturat 
development, inootne generation, and miccu-etreprencuiship development 
5.1.1. Ensure conformity and compliance af food natoty policies flaws, standards and regulations) 
5.1.2, Develop, improve, and establish traceability mechanisms-and enforce regulatory frameworks to. 
control food havards within the food supply chain 
450 5.1.3, Develop and promote education and-consamer uywarences on food safety 
 
45t 5.2.3. Minimise oci-furm food laszes 
= SZ 5.2.2, Reduce off-fiumn losses 
| 53 5.2:3. Tackle food waste 
OBJECTIVE 5 
To strengthen cross-soctoral food and 
antrition sccurity governance, coordination, 
capicity 
building 
and 
partnership 
for 
effactive 
palicy 
implementation 
6154 53.1. Produce/genenite, disseminate and ensiate acces to reliable and timely FNS duta and information 
by setting up an mter-agency FNS data sharing mechanism 
155 $3.2. Develop and implement 3 big data analytics ecosystem for tha food systeni sé 
5.3.3, Operutionatise the implementation of the NINSP, ity Plan of Action ané Country iveitment Plan 
for FNS through an effective M&E system 
 5.3.4, Ensure the ctogs-sectoral integration of the NFNSP, PoA and its mvestment plan with othee FNS- 
related mitiatives ard itt coherence with national sucio-cconomic deVelopment efYorix 
 
EE 207 fi |

| Objective 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__ Strategy Area of Intervention 
Strategy 5.4 38| 5.4.1. Develop and implement effective regulatory instruments-and guidelines for priority issues 
Strengthen regulatory | 59| 5.4.2 Strengthen gender mainstreaming for food and nutrition security 
eis ed cate ter 60) 5.4.3. Develop and promote climate-resilient food systems 
roles _ _ 
Stiategy $3 61 a5) ee policy uptake, mutrition leadership and imstitutional capacity of relevant secretariats 
EELERY |= and public institutions 
Strengthen ENS 62) 5.5.2. Strengthen the capacities at subnational level including local government, non-state actors and 
bene: policy consumer associations by facilitating knowledge exchange and partnerships 
stoning ane _ [63] 5.5.3. Strengthen private sector capacity by promoting the transfer of technologies and knowledge 
Jeadership across 64) 5.5.4. Establish frameworks for national and subnational FNS stakeholder partnerships to ensure mutual 
stakeholders secountability, transparency and effectiveness and operationalise an umbrella organization for the active 
 cogagement of stakehoiders, especially youth 
| 9208

mn , SE TE GENDER Pe Rea 1a: ee oe bs ea eT) 
WRT y 
Minnie te (ACM, BANAT 1) me Pr ett tar Vd Mas ly ALOE Th Pe pleat avila nee nti alot tunel 
. Prana. 
nw Ss és CO 
| EE : 1 a hae Aled Feat > 
rails PDR eat PRY 
DL on ft SUSTAINABLE 
A es DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS 
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy Plan of Action 
(2021-2030) has been prepared by the Government of Bangladesh, 
under the coordination of the Food Planning and Monitoring Unit 
(FPMU) of the Ministry of Food with technical support from Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) under the 
Meeting the Undernutrition Challenge (MUCH) project funded by 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and 
the European Union (EUV). 
of the Un|ted Nations 
Fig? Food and Agriculture Organization S USAI D aos 
FROM THE AMERICAN PROPLE