Plant Quarantine Wing
Department of Agricultural Extension, Ministry of Agriculture
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh

Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus medica (Zara
Lemon Variety) in Bangladesh
Final Report
NOVEMBER 2023

Bangladesh Trade Facilitation Project
Concord Bilkis Tower
40/6 Madani Avenue, Gulshan 2, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh
Website: https://btfproject.org/

ii

Panel of Authors

Contributors to PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon Varieties) in Bangladesh
Team Members
Position in the Panel
1. Prof. Dr. Md. Razzab Ali
Department of Entomology
Sher-e-Bangla Agricultural University
Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh

Team Leader cum
Entomologist
2. Prof. Dr. F. M. Aminuzzaman
Department of Plant Pathology
Sher-e-Bangla Agricultural University
Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh

Plant Pathologist
3. Dr. Md. Saleh Ahmed

Horticulturist
4. Dr. Sumon Saha
Associate Consultant and Senior Manager
Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd
Gulshan-1, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Entomologist
5. Mr. Md. Abul Hossain
Director
Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd (DTCL)
Gulshan-1, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Chief Coordinator

Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd (DTCL)
ISO Certification: 9001:2015
JB House, Plot-62, Road-14/1, Block-G, Niketon, Gulshan -1, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh
Website: www.dtcltd.com
DTCL

iii

MESSAGE

It is great pleasure to know that Bangladesh Trade Facilitation (BTF) Project funded by United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has conducted a time demanding study on “Pest Risk
Analysis (PRA) of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu variety) in Bangladesh”. The
Zara/Colombo Lebu export growth from Bangladesh is still very insignificant when the country
holds enormous potential producer of Zara/Colombo Lebu. But the Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) is the prerequisite for exporting Zara/Colombo
Lebu to foreign markets. However, the findings of this study will play an important role in
increasing the export quantity of Zara/Colombo Lebu from Bangladesh by fulfilling the
phytosanitary requirement to the importing countries in the world. Under the strong and
visionary leadership for trade facilitation of agricultural products from Bangladesh to the
potential markets of the world, Bangladesh Trade Facility (BTF) Project has undertaken
measures and initiatives to conduct the “PRA of Citrus medica in Bangladesh” that will enhance
the exports of quality Zara/Colombo Lebu from Bangladesh to the buyer countries in the world.
Considering the purview of this activity, I am confident that this PRA report will facilitate the
trades of Zara/Colombo Lebu internationally that will contribute to the national economy of the
country through export-earning.
It is expected that the report will contribute immensely to the buyer countries in the world who
are interested to import Citrus medica (Zara and Colombo Lebu varieties) from Bangladesh.
This report will also help and understanding the status of pests of Zara and Colombo Lebu for
the quarantine officials, producers, and other relevant stakeholders in Bangladesh. I look
forward to the proper use of these PRA study findings for the effective performance in the arena
of Zara/Colombo Lebu trade facilitation.

(Badal Chandra Biswas)
Director General
Department of Agriculture Extension
Ministry of Agriculture
Khamarbari, Dhaka, Bangladesh

iv

MESSAGE

I am pleased to know that the Land O’Lakes Bangladesh Trade Facilitation (BTF) Project funded
by United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has conducted the “Pest Risk Analysis
(PRA) of Citrus medica (Zara /Colombo Lebu variety) in Bangladesh” through a third-party
consulting firm named Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd. (DTCL), Dhaka. As a part
of National Plant Protection Organization (NPPO) of Bangladesh, Plant Quarantine Wing
(PQW), Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE), Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh is
playing vital role in performing phytosanitary related activities during export-imports of
agricultural products to and from Bangladesh. In this regard, the time demanding initiative of
conducting ‘Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus medica (Zara /Colombo Lebu variety) in
Bangladesh’ taken by Bangladesh Trade Facilitation (BTF) Project will fulfill the phytosanitary
requirement of the buyer countries of the world to import Citrus medica (Zara /Colombo Lebu
variety) from Bangladesh.

I hope that this PRA report will help the exporters to take initiative in exporting quality Zara
/Colombo Lebu from Bangladesh that will contribute to the national economy of the country
through export-earning. It is also expected that this report will help quarantine officials under
Plant Quarantine Wing of DAE to understand the pest status of Zara /Colombo Lebu variety in
Bangladesh and will help in decision making at port-of-entry in Bangladesh during exportimport of Zara /Colombo Lebu variety. I look forward to the proper use of the present PRA
findings for the effective performance in the arena of trade facilitation worldwide for Zara
/Colombo Lebu as well as for further export-earning in Bangladesh.

_______________________
(Dr. Md. Rezaul Karim)
Director
Plant Quarantine Wing
Department of Agriculture Extension
Ministry of Agriculture
Khamarbari, Dhaka, Bangladesh

v

FORWARD

The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bangladesh Trade Facilitation (BTF) completed a study on
“Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus Medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu) in Bangladesh” in
support of the Government of Bangladesh’s initiatives to expand export of agricultural products.
BTF contracted with Development Technical Consultants Pvt. Ltd. (DTCL), which conducted
the PRA study over a six-month period commencing in March 2023.
The objectives of the PRA for Zara/Colombo lemon are to identify the pests impacting Citrus
Medica in Bangladesh, (ii) to assess the risks of quarantine pests, and (iii) to identify risk
management options. For this purpose, DTCL conducted field investigations in 13 Upazilas
covering four major Zara/Colombo Lebu growing districts of Bangladesh. The PRA team also
studied secondary information related to relevant pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu.
The PRA findings identified 26 arthropod pests, 32 diseases and three weeds. The study also
identified 15 quarantine pests, including seven insect pests, three mite pests, one fungal, two
bacterial, and two viral diseases that could potentially be introduced into Bangladesh through
imported citrus. Based on the risk assessment and risk rating following relevant ISPMs, among
15 quarantine pests, two pests were rated as high-risk potential, one pest as medium risk, one
pest as low-risk, and one pest was remarked as uncertain level of risk. DTCL provided risk
management options for these quarantine pests in line with pre- and post-harvest management
and phytosanitary measures consistent with the ISPMs. The findings of the PRA were validated
at a national level workshop organized by BTF and the Plant Quarantine Wing.
I commend DTCL for completing the PRA study successfully and thank the Department of
Agriculture Extension (DAE) and PQW for making the collaborative endeavor a success. BTF
extends our special appreciation to the quarantine and other DAE officials and to lemon
exporters for strong cooperation. Special thanks to the Secretary and Additional Secretary
(Extension), Ministry of Agriculture; Director General, Department of Agriculture
Extension; and Director, Plant Quarantine Wing for providing valuable advice and guidance.
I hope that this PRA report significantly contributes to enhance the exports of Citrus medica
(Zara/Colombo Lebu variety) from Bangladesh by fulfilling the requirement of buyer
countries in the world.

_____________________
(Michael J. Parr)
Project Director
Bangladesh Trade Facilitation Project

vi

Acronyms

AEZ
:
AGRO-ECOLOGICAL ZONE
BARI
:
BANGLADESH AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE
BBS
:
BANGLADESH BUREAU OF STATISTICS
BTF
:
BANGLADESH TRADE FACILITATION PROJECT
CABI
:
CENTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND BIO-SCIENCES INTERNATIONAL
DAE
:
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION
DD
:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR
DG
:
DIRECTOR GENERAL
DR.
:
DOCTOR
DTCL
:
DEVELOPMENT TECHNICAL CONSULTANTS PRIVATE LIMITED
EPPO
:
EUROPEAN AND MEDITERRANEAN PLANT PROTECTION ORGANIZATION
et al.
:
AND ASSOCIATES
EU
:
EUROPEAN UNION
FAO
:
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION
FAOSTAT
:
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION STATISTICS
FGD
:
FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION
GOB
:
GOVERNMENT OF BANGLADESH
IAS
:
INVASIVE ALIEN SPECIES
IPPC
:
INTERNATIONAL PLANT PROTECTION CONVENTION
IPM
:
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT
ISPM
:
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD FOR PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
J.
:
JOURNAL
KII
:
KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEW
KM
:
KILOMETER
LTD
:
LIMITED
MD
:
MANAGING DIRECTOR
MOA
:
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
MT
:
METRIC TON
NO.
:
NUMBER
NPPO
:
NATIONAL PLANT PROTECTION ORGANIZATION
OC
:
DEGREE CELSIUS
PD
:
PROJECT DIRECTOR
PFA
:
PEST FREE AREA
PQW
:
PLANT QUARANTINE WING
PRA
:
PEST RISK ANALYSIS
PROF.
:
PROFESSOR
PVT.
:
PRIVATE
RH
:
RELATIVE HUMIDITY
SAAO
:
SUB-ASSISTANT AGRICULTURE OFFICER
SAU
:
SHER-E-BANGLA AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
SPCB
:
STRENGTHENING PHYTOSANITARY CAPACITY PROJECT IN BANGLADESH
UAO
: UPAZILA AGRICULTURE OFFICER
UK
:
UNITED KINGDOM
USA
:
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
USDA
:
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
VHT
:
VAPOR HEAT TREATMENT
WTO
:
WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION

Executive Summary

The study “Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus medica (Zara/ lemon) in Bangladesh” documents
consist of the pests of Zara or Colombo lebu (Local Name) available in Bangladesh and the risks
associated with the import pathway of citrus from the exporting countries namely India, Bhutan,
China, Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, Egypt, South Africa, Brazil and USA into Bangladesh. The
major objectives of the study included recording of major and minor insect pests, diseases, weeds
or other pests, with label of infestation and economic impacts.
The study was done including several approaches such as face-to-face interview with
Zara/Colombo lebu growers, Focus Group Discussion (FGDs) with farmers, Key Informant
Interviews (KIIs) with different stakeholders, scanning of reports and internet searching. The
survey study was conducted in the 4 major Zara/Colombo Lemongrowing districts of
Bangladesh as selected by the client. A total of 13 upazila under 4 selected Zara/Colombo
Lemongrowing districts were covered as PRA areas, where two unions for each upazila and 20
Zara/Colombo Lemon growers for each union were selected for face-to-face interview. Thus, a
total of 520 Zara/Colombo Lemon growers were interviewed through a pre-designed structured
questionnaire from all of 4 sampled districts. In addition of quantitative survey, to get the
qualitative information, a total of 4 focus group discussion (FGD) meetings was also conducted
considering one FGD for each of 4 sampled districts with the participation of at least 10
Zara/Colombo Lemon growers for each FGD to gather qualitative data regarding pests of
Zara/Colombo Lemon available in Bangladesh. Besides, one officer designated as Additional
Deputy Director (Plant Protection) from each of 4 Zara/Colombo Lemongrowing districts and
one Upazila Agricultural Officer (UAO) of DAE from each of 13 sampled upazila, three
quarantine officials of DAE including Quarantine Pathologist of Plant Quarantine Center at
Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport and central packaging house, Dhaka, Bangladesh Fruits,
Vegetables & Allied Products Exporter's Association (BFVAPEA), and two entomologists and
two plant pathologists were also interviewed using semi-structured key informant interview
(KII) checklists.
A total number of 26 arthropod pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon variety) were
recorded in Bangladesh as reported by the Zara/Colombo lemon growers and relevant experts
collected through field survey as well as collected through literature review. Among these 26
arthropod pests, 16 were identified through field survey and the rest 10 were identified through
literature review. As per field survey-based data, it was revealed that the incidence of sixteen
(16) arthropod pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon varieties) were identified, of which
fifteen (15) were insect pests and one was mite pest. Among fifteen (15) insect pests those
recorded for Bangladesh were lemon butterfly (Papilio demoleus, Papilio polytes), citrus leaf
miner (Phyllocnistis citrella), citrus leaf roller (Psorosticha zizyphi), citrus stem borer
(Chelidonium cinctum), citrus mealybug (Planococcus citri), Asian citrus psyllid bug
(Diaphorina citri), citrus blackfly (Aleurocanthus woglumi), citrus greenhouse whitefly
(Trialeurodes vaporariorum), black citrus aphid (Toxoptera citricida), green citrus aphid
(Aphis spiraecola), citrus soft scale (Coccos hesperidum), citrus green stink bug (Nezara
viridula), citrus thrips (Scirtothrips dorsalis), citrus fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), and termite
(Odontotermes obesus). As per field survey-based primary data, it was also revealed that the
vii

citrus red spider mite (Panonychus citri) of Zara/Colombo Lemon was recorded for Bangladesh.
Based on the literature review, it was revealed that a total of ten (10) insect pests of Citrus medica
were recorded for Bangladesh and these were fruit sucking moth (Othreis spp.), orange spined
bug (Biprorulus bibax), citrus bug (Rhynchocoris humeralis), citrus whitefly (Dialeurodes citri),
striped mealybug (Ferrisia virgata), citrus red scale (Aonidiella aurantia), citrus yellow scale
(Aonidiella citrina), flower thrips (Frankliniella schultzei), bark and stem borer (Indarbela
quadrinotata) and Oriental fruit fly (Bactrocera dorsalis). Among the identified insect pests,
lemon butterfly, leaf miner, citrus thrips and citrus aphids were reported more damaging than
other insect pests and these insects were designated as major insect pests of Citrus medica
(Zara/Colombo Lemon variety) and caused damage with high infestation intensity.
Two mollusk pests were reported by the Zara/Colombo Lemon growers during the field survey,
and these were grey garden slug (Deroceras reticulatum) and brown garden snail (Cornu
aspersum). Both pests were designated as minor pest with low infestation intensity.
A total number of 33 diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon variety) were recorded
in Bangladesh as reported by the Zara/Colombo lemon growers and relevant experts collected
through field survey as well as collected through literature review. Among these 33 diseases, 13
diseases identified through field survey and the rest 20 diseases were identified through literature
review. As per field survey-based data, it was revealed that the incidence of thirteen (13) diseases
of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon variety) were identified, of which eleven (11) were
fungal diseases and another two (2) diseases were caused by bacteria. The fungal diseases of
were anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides), die-back (Fusarium solani and Phomopsis
citri), gummosis (Phytopthora citrophthora), scab (Elsinoe fawcettii), sooty mould (Capnodium
citri), pink disease (Botryobasidium salmonicolor), powdery mildew (Oidium citri), citrus wilt
(Fusarium spp.), black spot (Phyllosticta citricarpa) and melanose (Diaporthe citri). The
bacterial diseases of Zara/Colombo lebu varieties identified through field survey were canker
(Xanthomonas axonopoides pv. citri) and citrus greening (Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus). A
total of twenty (20) diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) were identified, of
which eight (8) were fungal diseases, two (2) were viral diseases and rest 10 diseases were caused
by nematodes. The fungal diseases of were blue/green mold (Penicillium sp.), damping off
(Pythium sp. and Rhizoctonia solani), black mold (Aspergillus niger), foam disease (unknown),
fruit rot (Fusarium sp.), bark rot (Melanomma citricola) and stem-end-rot (Lasiodiplodia
pseudotheobromae). The recorded viral diseases were Tristeza (Citrus tristeza virus) and
Psorosis (Citrus psorosis virus). Ten (10) diseases of Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties identified
through literature review were root lesion (Criconemoides sp.), stem injury (Ditylenchus
dipsaci), root decay (Helicotylenchus sp.), root lesion (Hoplolaimus indicus), root lesion
(Radopholus similis), root lesion (Pratylenchus spp.), root injury (Hoplotylus spp.), root decay
(Tylenchus semipenetrans), root decay (Xiphinema spp.) and discoloration (Tylenchorhynchus
sp.). Among the identified diseases, four fungal diseases such as anthracnose, die-back,
gummosis, scab and two bacterial disease such as citrus greening and citrus canker were reported
more damaging than other diseases and these diseases were designated as major diseases of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon variety) those caused damage with high infection
intensity. But canker was only designated as major disease of Zara Lemon, but never caused
disease on Colombolemon, i.e., the Colombo Lemon is resistant against citrus canker
(Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri).
A total number of three (3) weeds were reported as the problem in the field of Zara/Colombo
lemon in Bangladesh those were identified through field survey. The enlisted weeds were asthma
weed (Euphorbia hirta), sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) and Dove weed (Murdannia
nudiflora).
viii

Information on pests associated with citrus in the exporting countries—India, Bhutan, China,
Egypt, Thailand, Pakistan, South Africa, USA, Australia, etc—reveal that pests of quarantine
importance exist. The study also revealed fifteen (15) species of quarantine pests of citrus for
Bangladesh were identified those were present in the above-mentioned exporting countries but
not in Bangladesh. Among these 15 species of quarantine pests, 7 were insect pests, 3 were mite
pests, 1 was fungi, 2 were bacteria and 2 were virus. Without mitigation, these pests could be
introduced into Bangladesh through importation of commercially produced citrus. The
quarantine insect pests are Citrus longhorn beetle (Anoplophora chinensis), Citrus weevil
(Diaprepes abbreviates), African citrus psyllid (Trioza erytreae), Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly
(Ceratitis capitate), Queensland fruit fly (Bactrocera tryoni), South African citrus thrips
(Scirtothrips aurantia) and California Citrus thrips (Scirtothrips citri). The quarantine mite pests
are Citrus rust mite (Phyllocoptruta oleivora), Citrus bud mite (Aceria sheldon) and Lewis spider
mite (Eotetranychus lewisi).
On the other hand, five (5) disease causing pathogens have been identified as quarantine pests
of citrus for Bangladesh. Among the disease-causing quarantine pathogens 1 is fungus named
Greasy spot (Mycosphaerella citri), 2 are bacteria named Citrus variegated chlorosis (Xylella
fastidiosa subsp. Pauca) and Citrus stubborn (Spiroplasma citri) and 2 are virus named Citrus
exocortis (Citrus exocortis viroid) and Indian citrus ringspot virus (Indian citrus ringspot virus).
The consequences and potential/likelihood of introduction of each quarantine pest were assessed
individually, and a risk rating estimated for each. The consequence and potential of introduction
value was estimated assessing biology, host, distribution, hazard identification, risk assessment,
consequence assessment, risk estimation and risk management of the pests: The two values were
summed to estimate an overall Pest Risk Potential, which is an estimation of risk in the absence
of mitigation.
Out of 15 quarantine pests associated with the pathway risk assessed. Out of 15 potential hazard
organisms, 12 hazard organisms were identified with high-risk potential, 1 moderate, 1 low and
1 uncertain species was found which likely to be associated with host plants during importation
from exporting countries but remained as uncertain hazards due to lack of detail information.
These mean that these pests pose unacceptable phytosanitary risk to Bangladesh’s agriculture.
The risk assessment of regulated non-quarantine pests, including citrus leaf miner, Citrus thrips
and citrus canker, is crucial for protecting citrus cultivation and the agricultural ecosystem in
Bangladesh. Following ISPM 21 guidelines, this assessment aims to identify potential impacts,
pathways of introduction, and effective management strategies to mitigate risks. Visual
inspection at ports-of-entry for high-risk potential pests is insufficient to safeguard Bangladesh’s
citrus industry and specific phytosanitary measures are strongly recommended. While for
moderate risk potential pest, specific phytosanitary measures may be necessary to reduce pest
risk.

ix

Table of Contents

CHAPTER

CONTENT

PAGE

Executive Summary
iv-vi

Table of contents
vii-ix
CHAPTER 1
Scope and Methodology of Pest Risk Analysis
1-15
1.1.
Background
1.2.
Reasons for conducting PRA
1.3.
Scope of the Pest Risk Analysis
1.4.
Objectives of the Current PRA study
1.5.
PRA Areas
1.6.
Methodology of Pest Risk Analysis
1.7.
Methodology for data collection
CHAPTER 2
Risk analysis process and methodology
16-25
2.1.
Undertaking of Pest Risk Analysis (PRA)
2.2.
Import Pathway Description
2.3.
Hazard Identification
2.4.
Risk Assessment of Potential Hazards
2.5.
Assessment of Uncertainties
2.6.
Risk Management
2.7.
Risk Evaluation
2.8.
Option Evaluation
2.9.
Review and Consultation
CHAPTER 3
Initiation
26-57
3.1.
Introduction
3.2.
Commodity Description
3.3.
Description of the Import Pathway
3.4.
Geographic Position and General Climate of Importing Country—
Bangladesh
3.5.
Geographic Position and General Climate of Exporting Countries
3.6.
Pests of Citrus in Exporting Countries
3.7.
References
CHAPTER 4
Hazard Identification
58-61
4.1.
Introduction
4.2.
Potential Hazard Groups
4.3.
Interception of Pests on Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu
varieties) from Existing Pathways
4.4.
Review of earlier PRA

4.5.
Other Risk Characteristics of the Commodity
4.6.
Assumptions and Uncertainties
4.7.
Assumptions and Uncertainties around hazard biology
4.8.
Assumption and Uncertainties around the Inspection Procedure
4.9.
Assumption around Transit Time of Commodity on the Air
Pathway
CHAPTER 5
Review of Management Options
62-78
5.1.
Management Options for Non-quarantine Pests of Citrus
5.2.
Management Options for Quarantine Pests of Citrus for
Bangladesh
5.3.
References
CHAPTER 6
Identification of Pests
79-116
6.1.
Introduction
6.2.
Pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo lemonvariety) recorded in
Bangladesh
6.3.
Management options for combating pests of Zara/Colombo lebu
6.4.
Possible ways of entry of quarantine pests into Bangladesh
6.5.
Effective ways to prevent the entry of quarantine pests into
Bangladesh
6.6.
Options to prevent the spread of quarantine pests of citrus within
Bangladesh
6.7.
Measures need to be taken by the exporters to export Zara/Colombo
lemon
6.8.
References
CHAPTER 7
RISK ASSESSMENT
117-238
7.1.
Introduction
7.2.
Pest Categorization: Identification of Quarantine Pests Likely to
Follow the Pathway
7.3
Risk assessment
7.3.A.
Arthropod: Insect and Mites Pests
7.3.A.1.
Citrus longhorn beetle, Anoplophora chinensis
157-163
7.3.A.2.
Citrus weevil, Diaprepes abbreviates
164-167
7.3.A.3.
African citrus psyllid, Trioza erytreae
167-172
7.3.A.4.
Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly, Ceratitis capitate
173-180
7.3.A.5.
Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera tryoni
180-186
7.3.A.6.
South African citrus thrips, Scirtothrips aurantii
187-193
7.3.A.7.
California citrus thrips, Scirtothrips citri
193-199
7.3.A.8.
Citrus rust mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora
199-202
7.3.A.9.
Citrus bud mite, Aceria sheldoni
202-205
7.3.A.10.
Lewis spider mite, Eotetranychus lewisi
205-208
7.3.B.
Disease Causing Pathogen: Bacteria
7.3.B.11.
Citrus variegated chlorosis, Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca
208-2012
7.3.B.12.
Stubborn disease of citrus, Spiroplasma citri
212-216

7.3.C.
Disease Causing Pathogen: Virus
7.3.C.13.
Citrus exocortis virus, Citrus exocortis viroid
216-219
7.3.C.14.
Indian citrus ringspot virus, Indian citrus ringspot virus
220-222
7.D.
Conclusion: Pest Risk Potential and Pests Requiring Phytosanitary
Measures
7.4.
Uncertainty
7.5.
Risk Analysis of Regulated Non-quarantine pest
7.5.1.
Citrus leaf miner, Phyllocnistis citrella
7.5.2
Citrus thrips, Scirtothrips dorsalis (Hood, 1919)
7.5.3
Citrus canker, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse)
CHAPTER 8
Risk Management
239-242
8.1.
Risk Management Options and Phytosanitary Procedures
8.2.
Risk Management Conclusions
8.3.
Recommendation

Chapter 1: Scope and Methodology of Pest Risk Analysis

1.1. Background
Pest risk analysis (PRA) provides the rationale for phytosanitary measures for a specified PRA
area. It is the process of evaluating biological or other scientific and economic evidence to
determine whether a pest should be regulated and the strength of any Phytosanitary measures to
be taken against it. The unwanted pests may be introduced into the country through potential
carriers such as people, commodities and conveyances. For excluding foreign pests, recognition
of these risks' measures should be reflected in quarantine legislation to control the movement of
consignments as a way of protecting plant life and health. All these quarantine policy and risk
management measures should be based on risk analysis to minimize the trade barrier. As a
contracting party to the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), Bangladesh is
committed to follow the principles and guidelines of the IPPC. One of the main tasks of the
contracting party is to conduct pest risk analysis for safeguarding the country's agriculture from
entering the Invasive Alien Species (IAS) that are usually destructive pests (WTO, 19941). The
PRA includes list of pests of specific crops which are usually required for exporting agricultural
commodities because on the basis of presence of pests, climate and other criteria importing
countries consider importing agricultural commodities from other countries.
Now more than 300 Destructive Insects and Pests identified as Invasive Alien Species (IAS) are
prevailing in the world where Bangladesh is exclusively free from most of these pests. But
Bangladesh is afraid of maintaining such situations because Bangladesh has to import a huge
quantity (about 1 crore MT.) of plants and plant products every year. So, Bangladesh is at the
highest risk of entering those destructive pests because these are usually brought in along with
imported agricultural commodities. On the contrary Bangladesh has successfully entered into
the highly competitive international export market through which Bangladesh is earning a good
amount of valuable foreign currency through exporting 10-12 lakhs metric tons of agricultural
products. Bangladesh is one of the major Zara/Colombo Lemon (Citrus medica) producing
countries. The principal producing countries of the world are Algeria, Australia, Argentina,
Brazil, China, Cyprus, Greece, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Morocco, South
Africa, Spain, Egypt, Tunisia, Turky, U.A.E., U.S.A., etc. The climate of Bangladesh is very
congenial to the year-round production of citrus. World annual production of citrus fruits in 2021
was 161.0 million metric ton (MT). Total production in Asia was 78.67 MT, which is the highest
compared to the production in other continents. In Bangladesh, the total acreage under citrus
fruits in the fiscal year 2020-21 is about 162,242.69 acre while the total production is around
181,604.46 MT (BBS, 20212). Zara/Colombo Lemon is the leading seasonal high value cash
crop of the Sylhet and Narshingdi districts of Bangladesh and playing role in exporting earning.
However, the agriculture office does not have precise information on the amount of
Zara/Colombo Lebu produced in the districts annually. The Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu

1 WTO (1994). Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, 1994. World Trade
Organization (WTO), Geneva.
2 BBS. 2022. Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics of Bangladesh, 2021. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Ministry
of Planning, Bangladesh.

varieties) are exporting from Bangladesh mainly to Europe. The countries of European Union,
Gulf region such as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, UAE and Qatar are potential markets for
Zara/Colombo lebu of Bangladesh (Anonymous, 20213).

According to TRIDGE (2023), about 183.77 MT of lemon was exported from Bangladesh in
2021 and the export value of Bangladesh for lemon was 459.7 thousand USD. By exporting
lemon to the world market, production can be increased. The significant increase of Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) exports from Bangladesh can be achieved by taking effective steps
by the country’s regulators, lemon producers and exporters. To increase the lime export as
having Bangladesh’s potential, however, regulators must have to provide mindful attention to
conduct Pest Risk Analysis of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemons) in Bangladesh, a
prerequisite for exporting C. medica to foreign markets.
The introduction of insect pests, plant diseases and weeds are brought about mainly during the
accelerated agricultural development in different countries, when plants and plant materials are
brought into, or sent out with little or no concern for the insect pests, diseases and weeds that are
transported along with them. There are many instances of accidental introductions of insect pests
and diseases from one country to another. Extensive damages, often sudden in nature, have been
caused not by indigenous pests, but with exotic ones introduced along with plants, plant parts or
seeds in the normal channel of trade or individual interest. So, to safeguard agriculture of
importing countries from entering IAS by imported commodities as well as maintain and develop
the market access by fulfilling the importing countries’ requirement, PRA is most essential.
Considering this situation, the project has taken initiative to conduct PRA of Citrus medica
(Zara/Colombo Lemon) in Bangladesh.
1.2. Reasons for conducting PRA
Pest risk analysis (PRA) is a form of risk analysis conducted by regulatory plant health
authorities to identify the appropriate phytosanitary measures required to protect plant resources
against new or emerging pests and regulated pests of plants or plant products. Specifically, pest
risk analysis is a term used within the International Plant Protection Convention 1997 (Article
2.1) (IPPC, 1997)4 and is defined within the glossary of phytosanitary terms (FAO, 2015)5 as
"the process of evaluating biological or other scientific and economic evidence to determine
whether an organism is a pest, whether it should be regulated, and the strength of any
phytosanitary measures to be taken against it". In a phytosanitary context, the term plant pest, or
simply pest, refers to any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal, or pathogenic agent injurious
to plants or plant products and includes plant pathogenic bacteria, fungi, fungus-like organisms,
viruses and virus like organisms, as well as insects, mites, nematodes and weeds.

3 Anonymous. 2021. Diagnostic Studies. Bangladesh Regional Connectivity Project-1 (BRCP-1). Ministry of
Commerce, Government of Peoples Republic of Bangladesh.
4 IPPC (1997). International Plant Protection Convention 1997. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome.
5 FAO (2015). ISPM No. 5. Glossary of phytosanitary terms. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome,
34 pp.

In accordance with the WTO Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement, the IPPC aims to protect
plants while limiting interference with international trade (Work et al., 2005)6. A key principle
of the IPPC is that contracting parties (signatories) provide ‘technical justification’ to support
phytosanitary decision-making affecting trade (FAO, 2002)7. The IPPC recognizes pest risk
analysis as the appropriate format for such technical justification. The responsibility for
conducting pest risk analysis sits within government, specifically within a country's National
Plant Protection Organization (NPPO) and comes as an obligation when countries become
contracting parties to the IPPC (IPPC Article IV, 2a).
IPPC standards, referred to as International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM), have
been developed to assist NPPOs. The primary ISPMs relevant to pest risk analysis are ISPM 2,
Framework for pest risk analysis (FAO, 2007)8, ISPM 11, Pest risk analysis for quarantine
pests (FAO, 2013)9 and ISPM 21, Pest risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests (FAO,
2004)10.
As per ISPM No. 11 and ISPM No. 21, the specific objectives for conducting any Pest Risk
Analysis (PRA) of quarantine and regulated non-quarantine pests for a crop or commodity are
given below:
• To evaluate and manage risk from specific pests and internationally traded commodities;
• To identify and assess risks to agricultural and horticultural crops, forestry and the
environment from plant pests;
• To create lists of regulated pests and identify the quarantine pests of crops;
• To assess probability of entry, establishment, spread and consequences – economic,
environment and health impact;
• To overcome unnecessary barrier on international trade as well as to assist in identifying
appropriate management options.

1.3. Scope of the Pest Risk Analysis
The scope of pest risk analysis of Zara/Colombo Lebu in Bangladesh is to find out the potential
hazard organisms like insect and mite pests, diseases and other pests associated with different
citruses that are imported from different exporting countries such as India, Bhutan, China,
Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc. (DAE, 2023). Risk in this
context is defined as the likelihood of the occurrence and the likely magnitude of the
consequences of an adverse event.

1.4. Objectives of the Current PRA study
The overall objective of the Pest Risk Analysis of Zara/Colombo Lebu in Bangladesh is to
conduct Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) on Zara/Colombo Lebu and categorize risk as high, medium,
low and minimum and determine of an organism as a pest; create list of regulated pests of
Zara/Colombo Lebu for the purpose of import regulation; recommend appropriate pest risk

6 Work, T.T., McCullough, D.G., Cavey, J.F. & Komsa, R. (2005). Arrival rate of nonindigenous insect species into
the United States through foreign trade. Biological Invasions 7, 323–332.
7 FAO (2002). Guide to the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC). FAO, Rome, 20 pp.
8 FAO (2007) ISPM No. 2: Framework for pest risk analysis, FAO Rome, 35 pp.
9 FAO (2013) ISPM No. 11: Pest risk analysis for quarantine pests, FAO Rome, 26 pp.
10 FAO (2004) ISPM No. 21: Pest risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests, FAO Rome18pp.

management options in line with ISPM No. 11 in the framework of ISPM No. 2 and getting
approval from the concerned authority. The study is required to identify the pests, pathway/s,
evaluate their risk, endangered areas, and risk management options, etc.

For the total assessment and analysis, the following activities need to undertake for the Pest Risk
Analysis of Zara/Colombo Lebu in Bangladesh (according to ISPM No. 11 and ISPM No. 21 in
the framework of ISPM No. 2) are:
• To specify the area, need to do PRA with scientific evidence.
• Identification of pest and pathogen in the country and the neighboring countries with
distribution information,
• Categorization the major and minor insect pests, diseases, weeds or other pests, with label
of infestation and economic impacts,
• To evaluate the probability of introduction and spread of pests and potential economic
consequence in the specific area,
• Identification of pathway for the pests and pathogens that may be considered for pest risk
assessment,
• Cover the total PRA structure such as initiation, pest risk assessment and pest risk
management,
• Align the test information as appearing in ISPM No. 3: Guidelines for export, shipment,
import and release of biological control agents and other beneficial organisms (FAO,
2005)11, ISPM No. 11: Pest risk analysis for quarantine pests including analysis of
environmental risks and living modified organisms (FAO, 2013)12, ISPM No. 21: Pest
risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests (FAO, 2004)13 for conceptual
development,
• List down the biological control agents and other beneficial organism,
• Develop specific guideline on PRA of quarantine pest, regulated non-quarantine pest,
biological control agents and other beneficial organisms,
• List out the socio-demographic factors and their influences on lemon cultivators on
accepting pest management practices,
• The analysis of responsibility of agricultural extension agents for enhancing farmers’
knowledge on integrated pest control and improve expertise in lemon cultivation for
export purpose and recommendations for PRA institutionalization in the DAE, and
• Role of the government to estimate the likelihood of establishment of a pest together with
the environment affecting pest survival.
1.5. PRA Areas
The entire Bangladesh is considered as the PRA area in this risk analysis. But the Zara/Colombo
Lebu are not grown all over Bangladesh. Therefore, the major Zara/Colombo Lebu growing
districts such as Sylhet, Narshingdi, Moulovibazar and Tangail districts of Bangladesh are
considered as the PRA area in this Pest Risk Analysis Process. Moreover, the different citruses
and/or saplings of citrus are imported through different air, sea and land ports which are located

11 FAO (2005). ISPM No. 3: Guidelines for the export, shipment, import and release of biological control agents
and other beneficial organisms, 2005, FAO, Rome.
12 FAO (2013) ISPM No. 11 Pest risk analysis for quarantine pests, FAO Rome, 26 pp.
13 FAO (2004) ISPM No. 21: Pest risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests, FAO Rome18pp.

all regions of Bangladesh that are also considered as PRA areas. However, survey on insect and
mite pests, diseases, weeds and other hazard organisms associated with Zara/Colombo Lebu was
done in major Zara/Colombo Lebu growing districts of Bangladesh as well as ports through
which Zara/Colombo Lebu/saplings are being imported into Bangladesh.
1.6. Methodology of Pest Risk Analysis
PRA process includes three major stages such as Initiation, Pest Risk Assessment and Pest Risk
Management as adopted from ISPM No. 2 (2007). The following methods were sequentially
followed to conduct PRA of Zara/Colombo Lebu. The process and methodology for undertaking
import risk analyses are shown in Figure 1.

Figure-1.1: Schematic Diagram of Pest Risk Analysis Process

Monitoring of
Phytosanitary
Situation

Regulatory
Decision

(BEYOND THE
PRA PROCESS)
Stage 1:
Initiation

Including area
Specification

Initiation Points:

- Listing of Pests
- Pathway identity
- Consequences
- Risk management
& policy review
- Organism

Pest Risk Analysis
Adapted from ISPM No. 2 (2007)
Options for
Phytosanitary
Measures
Stage 3:
Pest Risk
Management
Risk not
Acceptable
Stage 2:
Pest Risk
Assessment
Pests
Risk Acceptable
STOP
STOP
Organism not a pet
INFORMATION GATHERING, DOCUMENTATION AND RISK COMMUNICATION
Pests

1.7. Methodology for data collection
1.7.1. Introduction
The methodology for the present PRA study used system-wide approach, which involved wideranging and sequenced discussion with relevant stakeholders aiming to identify the insect and
mite pests, diseases and other associated pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu, their potential hazards,
quarantine concern of the pests, their risk and management options. The study involved the use
of (i) quantitative field survey by means of interview of Zara/Colombo Lebu growers using
structured questionnaire, (ii) semi-structured interviews by means of focus group discussions
(FGD), (iii) interviews of key stakeholders by means of Key Informant Interview (KII); (iv)
review of secondary documents and reports and (v) visits of Zara/Colombo Lebu orchards and
observations.
1.7.2. Major Activities for data collection
1.7.2.1. Tools development: The data collection tools for field survey appropriate for different
stakeholders were developed in line with the scope and objectives of the pest risk analysis of
Zara/Colombo Lebu in Bangladesh. The most appropriate tools used in this field study were
structured questionnaire for direct interview of Zara/Colombo Lebu growers, FGD guidelines,
KII checklists for DAE personnel, quarantine personnel, Zara/Colombo Lebu exporters and
importers, Entomologists and Plant Pathologists of research organization and Agricultural
Universities, etc. as well as field observation checklist.
1.7.2.2. Quantitative Field survey: The field survey was conducted with the direct interview of
520 Zara/Colombo Lebu growers in thirteen (13) upazila under four (4) major Zara/Colombo
Lebu growing districts of Bangladesh for quantitative data collection aiming to identify insect
and mite pests, diseases, weeds and other pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu, their damaging status
including incidence and severity, and management options.
1.7.2.2. Qualitative Field survey: In addition of quantitative data collection, qualitative data
were also collected through qualitative survey by means of focus group discussions (FGD) with
Zara/Colombo Lebu growers and key informant interviews (KII) with extension personnel at
field and headquarter level of DAE, Plant Quarantine Officials at port of entry, Zara/Colombo
Lebu exporters and importers, Entomologists and Plant Pathologists of Agricultural Research
Organizations and Agricultural Universities, etc. The activities of FGD sessions in
Zara/Colombo Lebu growing districts as well as KII related activities are shown in the following
photographs:

Following photographs showing FGD related activities in Zara/Colombo Lebu growing
areas
Plate-1.2: Farmers’ level FGD session
conducted at Borolekha upazila under
Moulovibazar district
Plate-1.2: Farmers’ level FGD session
conducted at Ghatail upazila under Tangail
district
Plate-1.3: Farmers’ level FGD session
conducted at Monohordi upazila under
Narshingdi district
Plate-1.4: Farmers’ level FGD session
conducted at Goyanghat upazila under Sylhet
district

Following photographs showing KII related activities done at different level
Plate-1.5: PRA team conducted KII with
Upazila Agriculture Officer of Jaintapur,
Sylhet
Plate-1.6: KII with Scientist of Citrus
Research Center, BARI at Jaintapur, Sylhet

Plate-1.7: PRA team conducted KII with
Ditrict Training Officer at DD Office of
Sylhet
Plate-1.8: PRA team visited Office of the
Metropolitan Agriculure Officer of Sylhet to
conduct KII with respective Officer
Plate-1.9: PRA team conducted KII with
Upazila Agriculture Officer (UAO),
Monohordi upazila under Narshingdi ditrict
Plate-1.10: PRA team member conducted
KII with Upazila Agriculture Officer (UAO),
Modhupur upazila under Tangail ditrict
Plate-1.11: PRA team member conducted
KII with Quarantine Pathologist at Hazral
Shahjalal International Airport, Dhaka
Plate-1.12: PRA team member conducted
KII with Additional Deputy Director, Central
Packing House, Plant Quarantine Wing,
DAE at Shampur, Dhaka

Plate-1.13: PRA team member conducted
KII with Advisor of Bangladesh Fruits,
Vegetabes and Alied Products Exporters’
Association, Motijheel, Dhaka
Plate-1.14: PRA team member conducted
KII with Upazila Agriculture Officer (UAO),
Ghatail upazila under Tangail ditrict

1.7.2.3. Field visit and observation: Experts of the PRA study team physically visited the
sampled districts of the study areas. They observed the infestation status of the insect and mite
pests, diseases, weeds and other pests associated with the Zara/Colombo Lebu at field level and
recorded the information as required for this study.
Following photographs showing PRA study related field visit and observation activities done
at different stakeholders’ level

Plate-1.15: Visit of Zara/Colombo Lebu
farmers’ field by PRA study team members at
Borolekha under Moulovibazar district
Plate-1.16: Field visit and observation done by
PRA study team members at Goyanghat
upazila under Sylhet district

Plate-1.17: Visit of Zara/Colombo Lebu
farmer’s field by PRA study team at Jaintapur,
Sylhet
Plate-1.18: Visit of Zara/Colombo Lebu
farmer’s field by PRA study team at
Goyanghat, Sylhet

Plate-1.19: Experts’ visit of Research field at
Citrus Research Center, BARI, at Jaintapur
upazila under Sylhet district
Plate-1.20: Expert’s visit in the citrus field at
Citrus Research Center, BARI at Jaintapur
under Sylhet district

Plate-1.21: Zara Lebu field inspection by
expert member of PRA team at Goyanghat
under Sylhet district
Plate-1.22: Farmers’ field visit by expert
members of PRA team at Jaintapur under
Sylhet district

Plate-1.23: Experts’ visit in the farmer’s
Colombo Lemon field at Monohordi Upazila
under Narshingdi district
Plate-1.24: Expert’s visit in the farmer’s
Colombo Lemon field at Shibpur Upazila
under Narshingdi district

Plate-1.25: Expert’s visit in the farmer’s
Colombo Lemon field at Modhupur upazila
under Tangail district
Plate-1.26: Experts’ visit in the farmer’s Zara
Lemon field at Jaintapur upazila under Sylhet
district

Plate-1.27: Expert’s visit and observation of
packing activities of Zara Lemon at Central
Packing House at Shampur, Dhaka
Plate-1.28: Washing of Zara Lemons using
2.3% Sodium Ortho-Phenylphenate at Central
Packing House at Shampur, Dhaka

1.7.2.4. Secondary data collection and review: The current PRA related literatures and
information were collected from different secondary sources such as journals, books,
proceedings, internet browsing especially through websites of CAB International, EPPO Bulletin
and different LAN based e-Journals namely TEEAL, HINARI, AGORA, OARE, etc. The
documents were then critically reviewed and synthesized in relation to identify the quarantine
pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon available in the country of Zara/Colombo Lemon exports to
Bangladesh namely India, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, South Africa, Egypt,
Brazil, USA, etc. as well as to get the information regarding PRA related activities performed
there. Ultimately, study team formulated all this synthesized information based on the
requirement of the current PRA.
1.7.2.5. Listing of pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon
The insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds and other pests associated Zara/Colombo Lemon were
identified through the field survey, focus group discussion, Key Informant Interview, direct field
visit and secondary literature survey. Subsequently, study team prepared a list of insect and mite
pests, diseases, weeds and other pests associated with Zara/Colombo Lemon following the
relevant framework for pest risk analysis adopted by the IPPC in International Standard for
Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs) and other related ISPMs. The quarantine pests of
Zara/Colombo Lebu for Bangladesh were also listed.
1.7.3. PRA location and study sampling
The survey study was conducted in the 4 major Zara/Colombo Lemon growing districts of
Bangladesh as selected by the client. A total of 13 upazila under 4 selected Zara/Colombo Lemon
growing districts were covered as PRA areas, where two unions for each upazila and 20
Zara/Colombo Lemon growers for each union were selected for face-to-face interview. Thus, a
total of 520 Zara/Colombo Lemon growers were interviewed through a pre-designed structured
questionnaire from all of 4 sampled districts. The district and upazila-wise distribution of
respondents are given below:
Table-1.1: Distribution of the respondents in major Zara/Colombo Lebu growing districts
of Bangladesh
Sl.
No. District
No. of upazila
No. of union
No. of
village
No. of
farmers per
district
Sylhet
Gowainghat
Jointiapur
Beanibazar
Moulavibazar
Juri
Barlekha
Kulaura
Sreemangal
Narshingdi
Monohardi
Raipura,
Shibpur

Sl.
No. District
No. of upazila
No. of union
No. of
village
No. of
farmers per
district
Tangail
Shakhipur
Madhupur
Ghatail
Total

In addition of quantitative survey, to get the qualitative information, a total of 4 focus group
discussion (FGD) meetings was also conducted considering one FGD for each of 4 sampled
districts with the participation of at least 10 Zara/Colombo Lebu growers for each FGD to gather
qualitative data regarding pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon available in Bangladesh. Besides, one
officer designated as Additional Deputy Director (Plant Protection) from each of 4
Zara/Colombo Lemon growing districts and one Upazila Agricultural Officer (UAO) of DAE
from each of 13 sampled upazila, three quarantine officials of DAE including Quarantine
Pathologist of Plant Quarantine Center at Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport, Dhaka, two
Zara/Colombo Lemon exporters and two citrus importers, and two entomologists and two plant
pathologists were also interviewed using semi-structured key informant interview (KII)
checklists.
The distribution of Zara/Colombo Lemon producers as selected for interview in the present PRA
study is shown in the GIS Map of Bangladesh as follows:

Figure-1.2. GIS Map of Bangladesh showing the plotting of Zara and Colombo
Lemon Producers participated as respondeds in the PRA study
The district-wise distribution of Zara/Colombo Lemon producers as selected for interview in the
present PRA study is shown in the map of selected four districts as follows:

Figure-1.3: GIS Map of the Zara and Colombo
Lemon Producers participated in the
PRA study under Sylhet district
Figure-1.4: GIS Map of the Zara and Colombo
Lemon Producers participated in the
PRA study under Moulvibazar district

Figure-1.5: GIS Map of the Zara and Colombo
Lemon Producers participated in the
PRA study under Narsingdi district
Figure-1.6: GIS Map of the Zara and Colombo
Lemon Producers participated in the
PRA study under Tangail district
1.7.4. Interpretation of results
The collected information on pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon (Citrus medica), their risk
assessment and management options were analyzed and interpreted. The most vulnerable stages
of plant growth as well as parts of plants affected by the pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon were
also determined based on both primary and secondary data. Subsequently, a comprehensive list
of pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon was prepared based on locally available in Bangladesh as well
as quarantine pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon for Bangladesh as recorded in countries of
Zara/Colombo Lemon export. Finally, the necessary interpretation of the findings and risk
analysis of the quarantine pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon was done as per requirement of the
PRA study.
1.7.5. Photographic presentation of pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon
During field observation, the pictures of insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds and other pests
associated with the Zara/Colombo Lebu and its plants as well as plant parts were captured by the
camera during field level inspection. These photographs are presented in this report as evidence
of various activities related to present PRA study.

Chapter 2: Risk Analysis Process and Methodology

The overall pest risk analysis (PRA) process includes undertaking pest risk analysis, risk
assessment and risk management options of the identified pests. The process and methodology of
the PRA are described below:
2.1. Undertaking of Pest Risk Analysis (PRA)
The PRA study team followed a systematic process of pest risk analysis according to ISPM 11
in the framework of ISPM No. 2. The PRA process is a technical tool used for identifying
appropriate phytosanitary measures. The PRA process may be used for organisms not previously
recognized as pests (such as plants, biological control agents or other beneficial organisms, living
modified organisms), recognized pests, pathways and review of phytosanitary policy. The
process consists of three stages: 1: Initiation; 2: Pest risk assessment; and 3: Pest risk
management. As per the three (3) stages of PRA, the study team evaluated the commodity and
regulated articles and detection of pest for initiation stages.

PRA STAGE 1: INITIATION
Initiation is the identification of organisms and pathways that may be considered for pest risk
assessment in relation to the identified PRA area.
Steps of Initiation Stage: The initiation stage involves four steps:
Step 1: Determination whether an organism is a pest
Step 2: Defining the PRA area
Step 3: Evaluating any previous PRA
Step 4: Conclusion
When the PRA process has been triggered by a request to consider a pathway, the above steps
are preceded by assembling a list of organisms of possible regulatory concern because they are
likely to be associated with a pathway.
At the initiation stage of conducting PRA study, the report on “Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of
Citrus in Bangladesh” previously conducted in the year of 2014 as sponsored by the
“Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh (SPCB) under the Department of
Agricultural Extension (DAE)”, Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh has been considered as
basis for conducting the current PRA study. As per requirement of the international standard,
every five-year interval, PRA of any commodity need to be updated by the NPPO. Considering
these, the present PRA study has been initiated for conducting Pest Risk Analysis of Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) in Bangladesh.

PRA STAGE 2: PEST RISK ASSESSMENT

Pest risk assessment (for quarantine pests): Evaluation of the probability of the introduction
and spread of a pest and the magnitude of the associated potential economic consequences [FAO,
199514; revised ISPM No. 11 (FAO, 2013)15; ISPM No. 2 (FAO, 2007)16]
Pest risk assessment (for regulated non-quarantine pests): Evaluation of the probability that
a pest in plants for planting affects the intended use of those plants with an economically
unacceptable impact [ISPM No. 21 (FAO, 2004)17]
The process for pest risk assessment can be broadly divided into five interrelated steps:
Step 1: Pest categorization
Step 2: Assessment of the probability of introduction, establishment andspread
Step 3: Impacts
Step 4: Overall assessment of risk
Step 5: Uncertainty
In most cases, these steps were applied sequentially in a PRA, but it is not essential to follow a
particular sequence. Pest risk assessment needs to be only as complex as is technically justified
by the circumstances. This standard allows a specific PRA to be judged against the principles of
necessity, minimal impact, transparency, equivalence, risk analysis, managed risk and nondiscrimination set out in ISPM No. 1: Principles of plant quarantine as related to international
trade (FAO, 1995)18.
Analytical framework of risk analysis of potential pest/hazards is described belo
Pest categorization: The purpose of pest categorization is to determine whether a pest identified
during the initiation stage satisfies the criteria of being a quarantine pest. A quarantine pest is a
pest of potential economic importance to the area endangered thereby and not yet present there,
or present but not widely distributed and being officially controlled (FAO, 2013)19. In this step,
potential hazards/organisms are categorized along with their hosts, distributions, and finally,
conclusion is drawn whether the categorized potential hazards/organisms are present or not in
the PRA areas as well as in country of export from where the commodities associated with
categorized hazards/pests might be transported.
Assessment of the probability of introduction and spread: According to ISPM No. 11 in the
framework of ISPM No. 2, the probability of introduction and spread of quarantine pests was
assessed considering the following criteria:

Establishment Potential of this Pest in Bangladesh

14 FAO (1995). ISPM No. 1: Principles of plant quarantine as related to international trade, Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy.
15 FAO (2013) ISPM No. 11: Pest risk analysis for quarantine pests, FAO Rome, 26 pp.
16 FAO (2007) ISPM No. 2: Framework for pest risk analysis, FAO Rome, 35 pp.
17 FAO (2004) ISPM No. 21: Pest risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests, FAO Rome18pp.
18 FAO (1995). ISPM No. 1: Principles of plant quarantine as related to international trade, Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy.
19 FAO (2013) ISPM No. 11 Pest risk analysis for quarantine pests, FAO Rome, 26 pp.

Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years?
b. Possibility of survival during transport, storage and transfer?
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish?
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established?
YES
and
HIGH
•
NOT AS ABOVE OR BELOW
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter your
country and establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in your country and your climate is not
similar to places it is established
Low

Assessment of potential economic consequences: According to ISPM 11 in the framework of
ISPM-2, the potential economic consequences including environmental impacts of the
quarantine pests were assessed considering the following criteria:
Consequence Potential of the Pest in Bangladesh

Description
Consequence potential
a. Is the organism a serious pest of Bangladesh?
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
c. Environmental Impact
Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops
grown in your country.
Low

Overall Assessment of Risk for Bangladesh
Based on the establishment potential and consequence potential as assessed using the abovementioned criteria, the overall assessment of risk of the pests for Bangladesh is calculated using
the following Risk Matrix of the Quarantine Pest(s):
Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk
Risk Matrix of Zara/Colombo Lebu Pests for Bangladesh
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
PRA STAGE 3: PEST RISK MANAGEMENT

Pest risk management (in the analytical sense) is the process of identifying ways to react to a
perceived risk, evaluating the efficacy of these actions, and identifying the most appropriate
options. The uncertainty noted in the assessments of economic consequences and probability of
introduction were also considered and included in the selection of a pest management option.
The following figure briefly describes the risk analysis process and methodology for undertaking
pathway risk analyses. The risk analysis process leading to the final risk analysis document is
summarized in following Figure-2.1:
Figure-2.1: A summary of the risk analysis development process

2.2. Import Pathway Description
2.2.1. Import pathways of Citrus spp. including Zara/Colombo Lebu
For the purpose of this risk analysis, in Bangladesh, citruses are imported from anywhere of
exporting countries such as India, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, South Africa,
Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc.
To comply with existing Bangladesh’s import requirements, the commodity—here, the citruses
would need to be prepared in the exporting countries for exporting to Bangladesh by ensuring
certain pests such as insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds or any other pests are not associated
with the commodity—here, the citrus fruits and/or saplings. Commodity would then be sea or
land or air freighted to Bangladesh where it goes to a holding facility before being distributed to
dealers, distributors, markets, sellers and growers for cultivation or users of the imported citrus
fruits and/or saplings.
2.2.2. Pathway Description
The first step in the risk analysis process is to describe the entry pathway of the commodity. This
includes relevant information on:
• the country of origin, including characteristics like climate, relevant agricultural
practices, phytosanitary system;
• pre-export processing and transport systems;
• export and transit conditions, including packaging, mode and method of shipping;
• nature and method of transport and storage on arrival in Bangladesh as the country of
import;
• characteristics of Bangladesh’s climate, and relevant agricultural practices.
The import pathways of citrus fruits and/or its saplings from any country of export to Bangladesh
following the similar pathways of citrus that being imported. Considering the theme, the import
pathways of citrus is described below:
Establish the
project
Undertake the Risk
Analysis
Review the Risk
Analysis
Consultation with
Stakeholders
• Initiation and
prioritizing
• Project planning,
• Project scoping,
• Communication
strategy
• Describe the pathway &
commodity,
• Identify and list hazards,
• Risk assessment &
• Risk management
• Internal review,
• Review by
identified
experts
• Provide an
opportunity for
stakeholders to
comment on the risk
analysis

• Citrus and/or saplings in the countries of export such as India, Bhutan, China, Pakistan,
Thailand, Australia, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc. are being grown in the
orchard, either as a single crop or beside other field or horticultural crops;
• Monitoring of the insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds and any other pests of citrus is
undertaken, with appropriate controls applied in the orchard in country of export;
• Citrus fruits are being harvested, inspected and after necessary sorting and grading the
best quality fruits washed, pre-treated and packed in boxes;
• Post harvest disinfestations including fumigation or cold disinfestations are being
undertaken either before or during transport of citrus fruits and/or saplings to the country
of import—here, Bangladesh;
• Transport of commodity to Bangladesh is by airfreighted or sea or land port;
• Each shipment must be accompanied by the appropriate certification, e.g., a
phytosanitary certificate attesting to identity the Citrus, any treatments completed, or
other information required to help for mitigating the risks;
• Citrus fruits and/or its saplings are examined at the border to ensure compliance;
• Any citrus fruits and/or saplings not complying with Bangladesh biosecurity
requirements (e.g., found harboring pest organisms) are either treated or re-shipped or
destroyed;
• Beside these, natural entry of some pests of citrus may occur as cross-boundary pests
from other neighboring country(ies) into Bangladesh. This should be considered as
pathway of pest entry.
• Possibility of entry of pests of citrus from exporting country(ies) into Bangladesh through
transportation of commodities by escaping the phytosanitary inspection in the port of
entry. For example, pathogen of bacterial canker may infect citrus saplings without any
visible symptoms; the disease developing when the saplings are planted in the field.
• Citrus fruits and/or its saplings are stored before being distributed to market for sale.
• Dealers and sellers of citrus fruits and/or its saplings stock and these are bought to users
and or growers within the local area these are sold in. The linear pathway diagram of
import risk of citrus is shown in the following Figure-2.2:
Figure-2.2: Linear Pathway Diagram of Import Risk

2.3. Hazard Identification
The first step for any risk assessment is to identify the hazard as the risk is related to hazard.
Hazards are the unwanted insect pests, diseases (pathogen) or weeds or any other pests of citrus
which could be introduced into Bangladesh by risk goods, and are potentially capable of causing
Citrus gardens
in India, China,
Bhutan,
Pakistan,
Thailand,
Australia,
South Africa,
USA, etc.
Citrus fruits
harvest,
inspection and
packing
Transport to
Bangladesh
through land
transport or
Sea or AirFreight
Cargo
declaration
at Port of
entry in
Bangladesh
Examine/treatme
nt at port of entry
Citrus
fruits/saplings to
market for sale
Citrus distributed
throughout the
country
In field
monitoring
treatment
Treatment
during
shipment
Citrus fruits
destroyed or reexported

harm to citrus production including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties), must be
identified. This process begins with the collection of information on insect pests, diseases
(pathogen) or weed or any other pests of citrus present in the country of origin. Such list is
compared with the existing pests present in Bangladesh to prepare a list of exotic pests that might
be associated with the commodity harmful for Bangladesh, if introduce.
This list is further refined and species removed or added to the list depending on the strength of
the association and the information available about its biology and life cycle. Each pest or
pathogen is assessed mainly on its biological characteristics and its likely interaction with the
Bangladesh environment and climate. Hitch-hiker organisms sometimes associated with a
commodity, but which do not feed on it or specifically depend on that commodity—here, the
citrus, in some other ways are also included in the analysis. This is because there may be
economic, environmental and human health consequences of these organisms entering and/or
establishing. Diagrammatic representation of hazard identification is shown in the following
Figure-2.3:
Figure-2.3: Diagrammatic representation of hazard identification

2.4. Risk Assessment of Potential Hazards
Risk assessment is the evaluation of the likelihood of entry, exposure and establishment of a
potential hazard, and the environmental, economic, human and animal health consequences of
the entry within Bangladesh. ISPM No. 3 recommends that NPPOs should conduct a PRA either
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Potential hazard in this
risk analysis
Not considered to be a hazard in
this risk analysis
List of organisms
Is the organism likely to be
associated with the pathway?
Is the organism present in BD?
Could the organism bring a pest/
disease not present in Bangladesh?
Would the organism on the pathway
increase the existing exposure in BD?
Are there different strains in
overseas?
Is there a control program in
Bangladesh?
Yes
No

before import or before release of biological control agents and other beneficial organisms. The
aim of risk assessment is to identify hazards which present an unacceptable level of risk, for
which risk management measures are required.
A risk assessment consists of four inter-related steps:
• assessment of likelihood of entry;
• assessment of likelihood of exposure and establishment;
• assessment of consequences;
• risk estimation.
In this risk assessment, hazards were grouped to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort in the
assessment stage of the project. Where there is more than one species in a genus for example,
the most common or potentially damaging species is researched and analyzed in detail and used
as an example to cover major biological traits within the group. Any specific differences between
congeners are highlighted in individual analyses.
2.5. Assessment of Uncertainties
Estimating the likelihood of pest introduction and of the consequences that could result involves
many uncertainties. Uncertainty is always part of pest risk analysis (Griffen, 2012)20; very often
there is a lack of data necessary to reach secure conclusions. The subjective nature of pest risk
analysis is also a source of uncertainty. ISPM No. 11 recognizes that pest risk analysis involves
many uncertainties, largely since estimates and extrapolations are made from real situations
where the pest occurs to a hypothetical situation in the pest risk analysis area. In most cases
analyses performed during pest risk analysis use historical data to forecast potential future
events. It is important to document the areas of uncertainty and the degree of uncertainty in the
assessment, and to indicate where expert judgement has been used. This is necessary for
transparency and may also be useful for identifying and prioritizing research needs (Sansford,
1999)21.
The purpose of this section is to summarize the uncertainties and assumptions identified during
the preceding hazard identification and risk assessment stages. An analysis of these uncertainties
and assumptions can then be completed to identify which are critical to the outcomes of the risk
analysis. Critical uncertainties or assumptions are considered for further research with the aim
of reducing uncertainty or removing the assumption.
Where there is significant uncertainty in the estimated risk, a precautionary approach to risk
management also adopted. In these circumstances, the measures should be consistent with other
measures where equivalent uncertainties exist and be reviewed as soon as additional information
becomes available.
2.2.6. Risk Management
Risk management in the context of risk analysis is the process of deciding measures to effectively
manage the risks posed by the hazard(s) associated with the commodity or organisms under

20 Griffen, R. (2012) Uncertainty in pest risk analysis, p209-222. In: Devorshak, C. (Ed.) Plant Pest Risk Analysis
Concepts and Application. CABI, Wallingford. 296pp.
21 Sansford CE (1999). Pest Risk Analysis in the UK: Its use to identify research opportunities for exotic plant
pathogens. Proceedings of the National Office of Animal and Plant Health, Australia Workshop Plant Health in
the New Global Trading Environment: Managing Exotic Insects, Weeds and Pathogens, February 23 –24, 1999,
99–111.

consideration. It is not acceptable to identify a range of measures that might reduce the risks.
There must be a reasoned relationship between the measures chosen and the risk assessment so
that the results of the risk assessment support the measure(s).
Since zero-risk is not a reasonable option, the guiding principle for risk management should be
to manage risk to achieve the required level of protection that can be justified and is feasible
within the limits of available options and resources. Risk management identifies ways to react
to a risk, evaluating the efficacy of these actions, and presenting the most appropriate options.
The uncertainty noted in the assessments of economic consequences and probability of
introduction was also considered and included in the consideration of risk management options.
Where there is significant uncertainty, a precautionary approach was adopted.
2.7. Risk Evaluation
If the risk estimate determined in the risk assessment is non-negligible, measures can be justified.
2.8. Option Evaluation
Measures that are expected to be effective against the hazard species are considered. A package
of risk management measures is likely to be required to address the risk from all identified
hazards. Currently the established pathways are India, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, Thailand,
Australia, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc. for citrus fruits and/or saplings imported into
Bangladesh, border interception for these pathways cannot be extrapolated to predict any
possible level of slippage or efficacy of treatments. However, border interceptions can be used
as evidence of hazard organism association with the commodity. Each new pathway must be
regarded as unique, given differing pre- and post-harvest practices and treatment measures.
Different pest species are associated with each pathway and measures therefore must be tailored
to the individual organisms. So, it consists of
a) identified possible options, including measures identified by international standard setting
bodies, where they are available.
b) evaluated the likelihood of the entry, exposure, establishment or spread of the hazard
according to the option(s) that might be applied.
The result of outlining the risk management options would be either that no measures are
identified which are considered appropriate, or the selection of one or more management options
that have been found to lower the risk associated with the hazard(s) to an acceptable level. These
management options form the basis of regulations or requirements specified with an import
health standard.

Figure-2.4. Diagram of the Risk Analysis Process that includes hazard identification,
risk assessment and risk management

HAZARD IDENTIFICATION
RISK ASSESSMENT
Not considered to
be a hazard in
this risk analysis
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
List of organisms
Is the organism likely
to be associates with
the pathway?
Is the organism
present in Bangladesh
Is there a control
program in Bangladesh
Are there different
strains Overseas?
Would the organism
on the pathway
increase the existing
exposure in BD?
Could the organism
bring a pathogen/disease
not present in BD?
Potential
hazard in this
risk analysis
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
RISK MANAGEMENT OPTIONS
What options are available
to manage risks?
What is effect of each measure
on the level of risk?
Entry Assessment
likelihood of
potential hazard
entering BD on the
Pathway
Exposure/
Establishment
Assessment
likelihood of
exposure and
establishment in BD
Risk
Estimation
not considered
to be a hazard
in this risk
analysis
Non-negligible
Negligible
Negligible
Non-negligible
Consequence
Assessment likely
impact on the economy/
environment and
human health in BD
Non-negligible
Risk Estimation
Organism/ disease is
considered to be a hazard
in this risk
Negligible

2.9. Review and Consultation
The critique provided by the reviewers where appropriate, was incorporated into the risk analysis
to ensure it is based on the most up-to-date and credible information available. If suggestions
arising from the critique are not adopted, the rationale must be fully explained and documented.
Once a risk analysis has been peer reviewed and the critiques addressed, the risk analysis is then
published and released for public consultation.

Chapter 3: Initiation

3.1. Introduction
This chapter provides information on the commodity and pathway that is relevant to the analysis
of biosecurity risks and common to all organisms or diseases potentially associated with the
pathway and commodity—here, the citrus. It also provides information on climate and
geography of the country of origin as well as Bangladesh for assessing the likelihood of
establishment and spread of potential hazard organisms when enter and exposed to Bangladesh.
3.2. Commodity Description
3.2.1. Zara/Colombo Lebu: Citron (Citrus medica) is called “Zara Lebu” in Bangladesh. India
is commonly considered as the origin location of Citron. In India, citron was found under wild
conditions particularly in Nilgiris, Assam and lower Himalayas (Yaquis Liu et al., 2012)22. Zara
lemon is the first citrus fruit that is exporting from Bangladesh to Europe and other countries of
the world. The countries of European Union, Gulf region such as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, UAE
and Qatar are potential markets for Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) in Bangladesh.
Due to attack on canker disease, European Union banned Zara Lebu import from Bangladesh in
2008. Zara Lebu—a big variety of local citrus—to European countries has got a big boost over
kingdom was withdrawn in November 2011 (DAE, 2012)23.
The Zara/Colombo Lebu, Citrus medica belongs to the citrus family Rutaceae commonly known
as Citron that is primarily grown in the Indian subcontinent, particularly in the eastern region of
the country and Bangladesh. It is a type of lime that is known for its strong and distinct aroma,
which is described as a combination of lime and lemon with floral notes. Citrus medica
(Zara/Colombo lebu varieties) is often used in a variety of dishes, including marinades,
dressings, and desserts, and is a key ingredient in many traditional Bengali dishes.
Zara/Colombo is highly valued for its unique flavor and fragrance and is considered to be a
delicacy in South Asian cuisine. It is a seasonal fruit that is primarily available from July to
September and is often used in special occasions and celebrations. In recent years, Zara lemon
has gained popularity in the culinary world and has been used by chefs and mixologists in various
international cuisines and beverages.
3.2.2. Zara/Colombo Plant: Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) is a slowgrowing shrub or small tree that reaches a height of about 8 to 15 ft (2 to 5 m). It has irregular
straggling branches and stiff twigs and long spines at the leaf axils. The evergreen leaves are
green and lemon-scented with slightly serrate edges, ovate-lanceolate or ovate elliptic 2.5 to
7.0 inches long. Petioles are usually wingless or with minor wings. The clustered flowers of the
acidic varieties are purplish tinted from outside, but the sweet ones are white-yellowish. The
citron tree is very vigorous with almost no dormancy, blooming several times a year, and is

22 Yaquis Liu, Heying, E., Tanumihardjo, S. 2012. "History, Global Distribution, and Nutritional Importance of
Citrus Fruits". Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety. 11:6. doi:10.1111/j.1541-
337.2012.00201.x.tensionsbangladesh/
23 DAE, 2012. Plant Protection Wing, Department of Agricultural Extension, Khamarbari, Dhaka

therefore fragile and extremely sensitive to frost. The taxonomic position of Citrus medica
(Zara/Colombo Lebu variety) is given below:
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Plantae
Phylum: Spermatophyta
Subphylum: Angiospermae
Class: Dicotyledonae
Order: Sapindales
Family: Rutaceae
Genus: Citrus
Species: Citrus medica

EPPO Code: CIDME (Citrus medica Linnaeus)
3.2.3. Zara/Colombo Lebu Fruit: The citron fruit is usually ovate or oblong, narrowing
towards the stylar end. However, the citron's fruit shape is highly variable, due to the large
quantity of albedo, which forms independently according to the fruits' position on the tree, twig
orientation, and many other factors. The rind is leathery, furrowed, and adherent. The inner
portion is thick, white and hard; the outer is uniformly thin and very fragrant. The pulp is usually
acidic, but also can be sweet, and some varieties are entirely pulpless.
Most citron varieties contain a large number of mono-embryonic seeds. The seeds are white with
dark inner-coats and red-purplish chalazal spots for the acidic varieties, and colorless for the
sweet ones. Some citron varieties have persistent styles which do not fall off after fecundation.
Those are usually preferred for ritual etrog use in Judaism.
Some citrons have medium-sized oil bubbles at the outer surface, medially distant to each other.
Some varieties are ribbed and faintly warted on the outer surface. A fingered citron variety is
commonly called Buddha's hand.
The color varies from green, when unripe, to a yellow orange when overripe. The citron does
not fall off the tree and can reach 8–10 pounds (4–5 kg) if not picked before fully
mature. However, they should be picked before the winter, as the branches might bend or break
to the ground and may cause numerous fungal diseases for the tree.
Despite the wide variety of forms taken on by the fruit, citrons are all closely related genetically,
representing a single species. Genetic analysis divides the known cultivars into three clusters: a
Mediterranean cluster thought to have originated in India, and two clusters predominantly found
in China, one representing the fingered citrons, and another consisting of non-fingered varieties.
3.2.4. Varieties and hybrids: The acidic varieties include the Florentine and Diamante
citron from Italy, the Greek citron and the Balady citron from Israel. The sweet varieties include
the Corsican and Moroccan citrons. The pulp less varieties also include some fingered varieties
and the Yemenite citron.

Plate-3.1: Citrus medica fruit (Zara Lebu
variety) at field level
Plate-3.2: Citrus medica fruit (Zara Lebu
variety) at market level

Plate-3.3: Citrus medica fruit (Colombo
Lebu variety) at field level
Plate-3.4: Citrus medica fruits (Colombo Lebu
variety) at harvest level

3.2.5 Climate: Citrus are growing in warm climates from tropical to arid conditions in a wide
range of temperatures ranging from 10 ̊C to 35 ̊C and this climate is considered the most proper
climate for citrus growth and productivity. The optimal temperature range for citrus cultivation
is estimated to be 22–34 oC. Temperatures above this range lead to fruit abscission and smaller
fruit size. Organoleptic quality parameters such as the total soluble solids content (TSS) and total
titratable acidity (TTA), are also affected. So, the range of latitude and altitude in Bangladesh is
basically good for Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties). Bangladesh’s overall mean
annual temperature of 18 to 30 degree centigrade, which is quite good for Zara/Colombo Lebu
production. The humidity necessary to keep a citrus plant in good health is above 50% and
pebble trays are a good way to localize that humidity. Water actively growing plants moderately,
allowing the top inch of the potting mix to dry out between regular, thorough waterings. A
rainfall of about 150 cm to 250 cm is required for citrus production. The winter should be mild
and there should be no strong or hot wind during summer.
3.2.6. Soil: Citrus does best in slightly acidic, well-drained loam or sandy loam soils, but with
proper irrigation that drains easily, could grow well in clay soils. Plant trees in the spring in a
warm, sheltered, preferably south-facing position away from cold winds; cover plants in winter
if temperatures fall below 29 degrees.
3.2.7. Planting: The best planting time of Zara/Colombo lebu at the end of the rainy season
whereas in the study areas farmer started from June and continued up to August. Farmers make

pit before15-20 days. The average plant to plant and line to line distance was found 3 meters and
3 meters, respectively as practiced by the farmer. Deepness of pit was found 15 cm. Most of the
farmers maintain row their garden. The average number of cow-dung application, fertilizer
application, weeding, number of spraying and irrigation 8.5, 3, 3.5, 4.2 and 4 times, respectively
(Kaysar et al., 2017)24.
3.2.8. Zara/Colombo Lebu production in Bangladesh: Bangladesh is one of the major citrus
producing countries including Zara/Colombo Lebu. Citrus grows in almost all areas of
Bangladesh, but the Zara/Colombo Lebu growing areas are mainly Sylhet, Narshingdi,
Moulavibazar, Tangail, etc. districts. In Bangladesh, citrus occupies about an area of 36,568
hectare of land with a production of 3,82,828 metric tons during 2021-22, whereas it was 34028
ha of land with a production of 361,824 MT in 2020-2021 (according to DAE, 202325). But the
specific data on Zara/Colombo Lebu regarding acreage and production is not available.
3.2.9. Export-imports of Zara/Colombo Lebu in Bangladesh
Bangladesh exports different citruses particularly Zara/Colombo Lebu, Lime, Satkora, Pumelo,
Orange, Malta, etc. in different countries of the world mainly to United Kingdom and some EU
Countries particularly Italy, Germany, France, Switzerland, Denmark, etc. Other destinations are
Middle East, Singapore, Malaysia, Canada, etc. The Figure-3.1 depicted that the export volumes
of citrus as a whole from Bangladesh are approximately 1069 MT in the fiscal year 2022-23 (as
of March, 2023), which was 1252 MT in 2021-22, 1031 MT 2020-21, 734 MT in 2019-20 and
864 MT in the fiscal year 2018-19 (DAE, 2023). According to the information given by Central
Packing House, Shampur, Dhaka under Plant Quarantine Wing of DAE, the export volume of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) from Bangladesh to UK and European Countries
was about 379 MT in the fiscal year 2022-23 (as of May, 2023). The findings of these export
volumes of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) in last five years
revealed that the export amount is increasing continuously except the fiscal year 2019-20 and
2020-21 as because of Covid-19 Pandemic that hampered the international trading (Figure-3.2).
However, the Bangladesh’s export growth is still very insignificant when the country holds
enormous potential producer of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varities).
For many years, Bangladesh’s potential, however, remained largely untapped as the regulators
wasn’t mindful of implementing good agricultural practices (GAP), a prerequisite for exporting
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) to foreign markets.

24 Kaysar, I., Hoq, M.S., Mia, M.S. and Islam, M.S. 2017. An economic analysis of Zara and Colombo lemon
production in Bangladesh. 15(2): 289-296.
25 DAE. 2023. Plant Quarantine Wing, Department of Agricultural Extension, Khamarbari, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

According to the information given by DAE (2023), Bangladesh imports different kind of
citruses such as sweet orange, malta, lemon, satkora, pumelo, calamondin, etc. from different
citrus exporting countries viz. India, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, South Africa,
Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc. The amount of citrus imported by Bangladesh from different exporting
countries is about 216311 MT in the fiscal year 2021-22, which was 337292 MT in 2020-21,
32677 MT in 2019-20, 260814 MT in 2018-19 and 178963 MT in the fiscal year 2017-18
(Figure-3.3).
863.88
734.336
1031.23
1252.33
1068.77
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23 (as of
March 2023)
Amount of citrus export (MT)
Fiscal Year
Figure-3.1: Amount of Citrus (including Zara Lebu) export from
Bangladesh in last five year (2018-19 to 2022-23)
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
405.824
145.016
419.522
585.278
603.16
Quantity of Zara Lebu export (MT)
Fiscal Year
Figure-3.2. Quantity of Zara lebu (Citrus medica) export from Bangladesh
in last five years (2018-19 to 2022-23)

The introduction of insect pests, plant diseases, weeds and other pests associated with
commodity is brought about mainly during the accelerated agricultural development in different
countries, when plants and plant materials were brought into, or sent out with little or no concern
for the insect pests, diseases and weeds that were transported along with them. There are many
instances of accidental introductions of insect pests and diseases from one country to another.
Extensive damages, often sudden in nature, have been caused not by indigenous pests, but with
exotic ones introduced along with plants, plant parts or seeds in the normal channel of trade or
individual interest. The huge amount of import volume of citrus from different exporting
countries to Bangladesh may lead to introduction of Invasive Alien Species (IAS) of pests
associated with citrus during international trading and may cause severe damage to citrus
including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties), if they establish successfully. So, to
safeguard our agriculture from entering IAS by imported commodities as well as maintain and
develop our market access by fulfilling the importing countries’ requirement conducting PRA is
most essential. Considering this situation, the PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu
varieties) in Bangladesh was conducted.
3.3. Description of the Import Pathway
For the purpose of this risk analysis, citrus fruits such as sweet orange, malta, lime, satkora,
pumelo, calamondin, etc. are imported from anywhere in exporting counties particularly India,
Bhutan, China, Pakistan, Thailand, Australia, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, USA, etc. Hence, the
quarantine pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) for Bangladesh were identified
based on the pests those might be associated with citruses as available in the exporting countries
of the world from where Bangladesh usually imports citrus. During importation, the quarantine
pests associated with citrus may enter into Bangladesh that may cause serious damage to citrus
sector in the country. Considering the possibility of introduction and establishment, the risk
analysis of quarantine pests of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) was
done to set the proper mitigation and phytosanitary measures against those quarantine pests.

2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
Amount of citrus import (MT)
Fiscal Year
Figure-3.3: Amount of citrus import in Bangladesh in last five year (2017-
18 to 2021-22)
Amount of citrus import (MT)

Besides, Bangladesh also exports a good quantity of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu
varieties) along with other citrus in United Kingdom and some EU Countries particularly Italy,
Germany, France, Switzerland, Denmark, etc. and other countries such as Middle East,
Singapore, Malaysia, Canada, etc. To comply with existing export requirements for Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties), the commodity would need to be prepared for export by
ensuring certain pests (insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds or other pests) are not associated
with the product. Commodity would then be sea or land or air freighted from exporting country
where it goes to a holding facility before being distributed to dealers, distributors, markets,
sellers and farmers for cultivation of the exported Zara/Colombo Lebu. The linear import
pathway of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) from any country of export is presented
in the following figure:

Synthesis of figures 2.1 & 2.2 indicating how the risk analysis process is applied at the pathway
level.

Figure-3.4: Pathway and Likelihood of Entry Assessment

Hazard
Identificat
ion

Zara/Colombo
Lebu infested at
pre-harvest

Zara/Colombo
Lebu infested
at post-harvest
Infested
Zara/Colombo
Lebu undetected
at Port of Entry
Infested
Zara/Colombo
Lebu entered into
Bangladesh
Infested
Zara/Colombo
Lebu
treated/destro
yed or rehi
d
Countries of export:
Thailand, India,
Pakistan, etc.
Port of Entry
Bangladesh

Infesting organism
exposed to suitable
hosts in
Bangladesh?
Infesting organism
finds suitable
environmental and
climatic conditions
in Bangladesh
Likely consequences
include economic,
social and
environmental
Risk estimation and
Evaluation

What is the
acceptable
level of risk?

What
measures are
available?

How does assessed
risk compare to
acceptable level of
risk?

How do measures
reduce risk?
(Efficacy data,
etc.)
Risk Management at
Intervention Points
Apply measures that
mitigate risk
Remove/treat
infested
Zara/Colomb
o Lebu before
export
Reduce the
number of
infested
Zara/Colombo
Lebues in
fi ld

3.4. Geographic Position and General Climate of Importing Country—Bangladesh
3.4.1. Geographical Position of Bangladesh
Bangladesh officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh, is a country in South Asia; and is
bordered by India to its west, north and east; Burma to its southeast and separated from Nepal
and Bhutan by the Chicken’s Neck corridor, while in the south lays the Bay of Bengal.
The latitude of Bangladesh is 23°41'39.52" N and the longitude is 90°20'39.67" E. The
combination of these two coordinates mean that Bangladesh is located in the northern
hemisphere as well as the eastern hemisphere.
3.4.2. General Climate of Bangladesh
Bangladesh has a subtropical monsoon climate characterized by wide seasonal variations in
rainfall, high temperatures and humidity. There are three distinct seasons in Bangladesh: a hot,
humid summer from March to June; a cool, rainy monsoon season from June to October; and a
cool, dry winter from October to March. In general, maximum summer temperatures range
between 30°C and 40°C. April is the warmest month in most parts of the country. January is the
coldest month, when the average temperature for most of the country is about 10°C.
http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/climate/Bangladesh.htm
The minimum temperature in different locations of the country ranges from 10.0oC to 15.40oC
and lowest recorded Srimangal under Habiganj district and highest recorded in Cox’s Bazar
district on the bank of Bay of Bengal. The maximum normal temperature in different locations
of the country ranges from 31.80oC in Mymensingh district to 36.10oC in Chuadanga district.
Heavy rainfall is characteristic of Bangladesh. Most rains occur during the monsoon (JuneSeptember) and little in winter (November-February). With the exception of the relatively dry
western region of Rajshahi, where the annual rainfall is about 1600 mm, most parts of the country
receive at least 2000 mm of rainfall per year. Because of its location just south of the foothills
of the Himalayas, where monsoon winds turn west and northwest, the regions in northeastern
Bangladesh receives the greatest average precipitation, sometimes over 4000 mm per year.
About 80 percent of Bangladesh's rain falls during the monsoon season (WeatherOnline, 2015).
http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/climate/Bangladesh.htm
The Climate of Bangladesh can be divided in different climate zones. The central and southern
part can be classified as Aw26 climate, a hot, tropical climate with all months above 18°C and a
dry period in the winter. The northern mountainous areas can be classified as Cwa27 climate; a
Temperate, humid climate with the warmest month above 22°C and a dry period in the winter
(Arnfield, 2014). http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/climate/Bangladesh.htm

26 Aw means Tropical Savanna Climate (A = Equatorial, w = winter dry)
27 Cwa means Center Weather Advisory (C = Mild temperate, w = Dry winter, a = Hot summer)

3.5. Geographic Position and General Climate of Exporting Countries
3.5.1. India
Geographical position: India is situated north of the equator between 8°4' north (the mainland)
to 37°6' north latitude and 68°7' east to 97°25' east longitude. It is the seventh-largest country in
the world, with a total area of 3,287,263 square kilometers (1,269,219 sq miles). India measures
3,214 km (1,997 mi) from north to south and 2,933 km (1,822 mi) from east to west. It has a
land frontier of 15,200 km (9,445 mi) and a coastline of 7,516.6 km (4,671 mi).
India is situated north of the equator between 8°4' north (the mainland) to 37°6' north latitude
and 68°7' east to 97°25' east longitude. The combination of these two coordinates mean that
India is located in the northern hemisphere as well as the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: India’s climate can be classified as a hot tropical country, except the northern
states of Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir in the north and Sikkim in the northeastern
hills, which have a cooler, more continental influenced climate.
In most of India summer is very hot. It begins in April and continues till the beginning of
October, when the monsoon rains start to fall. The heat peaks in June with temperatures in the
northern plains and the west reach 45°C and more. The monsoons hit the country during this
period too, beginning 1st of June when they are supposed to find the Kerala coast, moving further
inland from day to day. Moisture laden trade winds sweep the country bringing heavy rains and
thunderstorms; sometimes these monsoon rains can be very heavy, causing floodings and
damage, especially along the big Rivers of India, Brahmaputhra and Ganges.
The plains in the north and even the barren countryside of Rajasthan have a cold wave every
year in December-January. Minimum temperatures could dip below 5°C but maximum
temperatures usually do not fall lower than 12°C. In the northern high-altitude areas of the
northern mountains, it snows through the winter and even summer months are only mildly warm.
The Climate of India can be divided in different climate zones. The eastern part of India and the
west coast can be classified as Aw climate, a hot, tropical climate with all months above 18°C
and a dry period in the winter. The southern Tip of India can be classified as Am climate, a hot
tropical Rainforest climate with monsoon rains and all months above 18°C. Central and
Northwest India have a BSh climate, a dry Steppe climate with an annual average Temperature
above 18°C. Finally, the northern mountainous areas can be classified as Cfa climate; a
Temperate, humid climate with the warmest month above 22°C (Weather Online, 2015a).
3.5.2. Thailand
Geographical Position: Thailand is in the middle of mainland Southeast Asia. It has a total
size of 513,120 km2 (198,120 sq mi) which is the 50th largest in the world. The land border is
4,863 km (3,022 mile) long with Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos and Malaysia. The nation's axial
position influenced many aspects of Thailand's society and culture. It controls the only land route
from Asia to Malaysia and Singapore.
The GPS coordinates denote that Thailand is positioned to the north of the equator. With a
latitude of 15.8700° N and a longitude of 100.9925° E, Thailand is surrounded by four other
Asian countries.

General Climate: Thailand’s Climate can be described as tropical monsoon climate. It is
characterized by strong monsoon influences, has a considerable amount of sun, a high rate of
rainfall, and high humidity that makes it sometimes feel quite uncomfortable.
The annual average temperature ranges from 22°C to 27°C year-round. There are two
distinguishable seasons in Thailand, a dry period in the winter and a humid rain period in the
summer.
Koeppen-Geiger classification: The Climate of Thailand can be classified as Aw climate, a hot,
tropical climate with all months above 18°C and a dry period in the winter. The southern coast
of Thailand has an Af28 climate, a hot, humid climate with all months above 18°C
(WeatherOnline, 2015c).
3.5.3. China
Geographical Position: China has great physical diversity. The eastern plains and southern
coasts of the country consist of fertile lowlands and foothills. They are the location of most of
China's agricultural output and human population. The southern areas of the country (south of
the Yangtze River) consist of hilly and mountainous terrain. The west and north of the country
are dominated by sunken basins (such as the Gobi and the Taklamakan), rolling plateaus, and
towering massifs. It contains part of the highest tableland on earth, the Tibetan Plateau, and has
much lower agricultural potential and population.
The GPS coordinates of China are comprised of a latitude of 35° 51' 33.46" N and a longitude
of 104° 08' 10.00" E. The combination of these two coordinates mean that China is located in
the northern hemisphere as well as the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: China’s extreme climate means it has a great diversity of climates, but being
located entirely in the northern hemisphere means its seasonal timings are broadly comparable
to those in Europe and the US.
The northeast experiences hot and dry summers and bitterly cold harsh winters, with
temperatures known to reach as low as -20°C (-4°F). The north and central region has almost
continual rainfall, temperate summers reaching 26°C (79°F) and cool winters when temperatures
reach 0C (32°F). The southeast region has substantial rainfall, and can be humid, with semitropical summer. Temperatures have been known to reach over 40°C (104°F) although this is
highly unusual, but during summer temperatures over 30°C (86°F) are the norm. Winters are
mild, with lows of around 10°C (50°F) in January and February. Central, southern and western
China are also susceptible to flooding, and the country is also periodically subject to seismic
activity.
Early autumn around September and October, when temperatures are pleasant and rainfall is
low, is generally seen as an optimum time to visit. Spring is also popular, for similar reasons,
and the many tourists visit in March or April.

28 Af means ‘tropical rainforest climate’. These climates usually occur within 10° latitude of the equator.

3.5.4. Bhutan
Geographical Position: Bhutan is a sovereign country at the crossroads of East Asia and South
Asia, located towards the eastern extreme of the Himalayas Mountain range. It is fairly evenly
sandwiched between the sovereign territory of two nations: first, the People's Republic of
China (PRC) on the north and northwest. There are approximately 477 kilometers of border with
the country's Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), or simply Tibet. The second nation is
the Republic of India on the south, southwest, and east; there are approximately 659 kilometers
with the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, West Bengal, and Sikkim, in clockwise order from
the kingdom. The Republic of Nepal to the west, the India to the south, and the Union of
Myanmar to the southeast are other close neighbors; the former two are separated by only very
small stretches of Indian territory. Bhutan is a very compact landlocked nation, but with just a
small bit more length than width.
The GPS coordinates of Bhutan are made up of two points. The latitude of Bhutan is 27.5142°
N, placing the country in the northern hemisphere and above the equator. With a longitude of
90.4336° E, Bhutan is also situated in the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: Bhutan's climate is diverse due to dramatic variations in elevation. The
Duars Plain tends to be hot and humid; the Lesser Himalaya region is often cooler; while the
areas in the Greater Himalayas are closest to that of alpine tundra. Like any other countries in
the world, Bhutan has four seasons in a year: Spring (March to May), Summer (June to August),
Autumn (September to November) and Winter (December to February).
In Bhutan, a small Asian country crossed by the Himalayas, the climate is influenced by altitude:
it is subtropical in the lowlands, and becomes progressively colder as you climb the mountains
slopes. In addition, the climate is influenced by the summer monsoon, which brings rains and
widespread cloudiness for almost six months per year, but especially from June to late
September.
In the thin flat southern region, in cities like Gelephu and Phuentsholing, the climate
is subtropical. Winter is very mild, but sometimes it can get cold at night. Spring, from March
to May, is hot, especially in April and May, when the temperature can reach as high as 40 °C
(104 °F); in addition, afternoon thunderstorms become more frequent.
From June to mid-October, it's the monsoon season, with abundant rainfall, at times torrential,
which
are
enhanced
by
the
proximity
to
the
mountains,
and
muggy
heat.
Total annual rainfall can exceed 3,000 millimeters (118 inches). The best time in this area is
from November to February.
In hilly
and
mountainous
areas up
to
1,500
meters
(5,000
feet),
the
climate
becomes progressively milder, with relatively cold, dry winters and warm, rainy summers, with
monsoon rains on the southern side, while in inland valleys, the summer rains are less intense.
For example, in Punakha, located at 1,300 meters (4,250 feet), the average temperature ranges
from 11 °C (52 °F) in January to 24 °C (75 °F) in July, so the summer is quite hot and humid
despite the altitude. Here are the average temperatures. Above 2,000 meters (6,500 feet), winter
are quite cold, with nights usually below freezing (0 °C or 32 °F).
In the capital, Thimphu, located in a valley, at an altitude varying between 2,200 and 2,600
meters (7,200 and 8,500 ft), the average temperature ranges from 6 °C (43 °F) in January to
21/22 °C (70/72 °F) in the period from June to August. Winter is dry and sunny, but snow can
sometimes fall. Here are the average temperatures in Thimphu. In Thimphu, the rains are not
abundant, although they reach or exceed 75 mm (2.9 in) per month from June to September.
The sun in Bhutan shines regularly in winter, while it does not shine very often in the monsoon
season. Here are the average daily sunshine hours in Thimphu.

3.5.5. Egypt
Geographical Position: Egypt, a country linking northeast Africa with the Middle East, dates
to the time of the pharaohs. Millennia-old monuments sit along the fertile Nile River Valley,
including Giza's colossal Pyramids and Great Sphinx as well as Luxor's hieroglyph-lined Karnak
Temple and Valley of the Kings tombs. The geographic position of the country is its highest
point is 6,668 feet and the lowest point is 436 feet below sea level. The Mediterranean Sea forms
Egypt's northern border, bringing cooler weather to the seaboard city of Alexandria and
providing a coastal getaway for Cairo's residents. To the east, lies the mountainous Sinai
Peninsula, which borders Israel and the Palestinian Territories; to the south, the deserts of Egypt
roll into the deserts of Sudan; to the west, the Great Western Desert forms an almost seamless
wilderness through Libya and beyond. The area of agricultural land in Egypt is confined to the
Nile Valley and delta, with a few oases and some arable land in Sinai. The total cultivated area
is 3.02 million ha, representing only 3 percent of the total land area.
The latitude and longitude of Egypt is 26°50'8.76" N and 30° 47'44.37" E, respectively. The
combination of these two coordinates mean that Egypt is located in the northern hemisphere as
well as the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: Egypt's climate is dry, hot, and dominated by desert. It has a mild winter
season with rain falling along coastal areas, and a hot and dry summer season (May to
September). Daytime temperatures vary by season and change with the prevailing winds. Cairo,
capital city of Egypt, which is located in the Nile valley has an average high temperature in July
is 35 ̊C and an average low of 9 ̊C in January.
3.5.6. South Africa
Geographical Position: South Africa, officially the Republic of South Africa (RSA), is a
country located in Southern Africa. It has 2,798 kilometers (1,739 miles) of coastline that
stretches along the South Atlantic and Indian oceans. To the north lie the neighboring countries
of Namibia, Botswana and Zimbabwe; to the east are Mozambique and Swaziland; and within it
lies Lesotho, an enclave surrounded by South African territory.
Latitude and longitude of South Africa is 30.0000 degrees South and 25.0000 degrees East,
respectively. The combination of these two coordinates mean that South Africa is located in the
southern hemisphere as well as the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: The climate of South Africa is usually 'dry' from April through to October,
and the main winter period runs from May to August. During this time, altitude plays an
important factor with temperatures. Along the coast, days are usually warm, but nights can be
quite cool.
Average temperatures in South Africa range from 15°C to 36°C in the summer and -2°C to 26°C
in the winter. South Africa is highly vulnerable to climate variability and change due to the
country's high dependence on rain-fed agriculture and natural resources.
The north of the country, including Johannesburg, the Kruger National Park, Limpopo Province,
the Kalahari Desert, Durban and northern KwaZulu Natal, is influenced by a sub-tropical climate
and receives most rainfall during the warmer summer months from November to March.

Temperatures can soar to 40C at this time, especially in the ‘lowveld’ areas of Mpumalanga and
KwaZulu/Natal, and it can also be very humid near the coast.
3.5.7. Brazil
Geographical Position: Brazil, officially the Federative Republic of Brazil, is the largest
country in South America and in Latin America. Brazil is the world's fifth-largest country by
area and the seventh most populous. Its capital is Brasília, and its most populous city is São
Paulo.
The GPS coordinates of Brazil are 14.2350°S and 51.9253°W. The first point is the latitude of
Brazil, placing Brazil in the southern hemisphere. The second point, known as the longitude,
means that the country is positioned in the western hemisphere.
General Climate: The climate of Brazil varies considerably mostly from tropical north (the
equator traverses the mouth of the Amazon) to temperate zones south of the Tropic of Capricorn
(23°26' S latitude). Temperatures below the equator are high, averaging above 25 °C (77 °F), but
not reaching the summer extremes of up to 40 °C (104 °F) in the temperate zones. There is little
seasonal variation near the equator, although at times it can get cool enough to need to wear a
jacket, especially in the rain. Average temperatures below the Capricorn Tropic are mild, ranging
from 13 °C (55 °F) to 22 °C (72 °F).
At the country's other extreme, there are frosts south of the Tropic of Capricorn and during the
winter (June–September), and in some years there are snowfalls on the high plateau and
mountainous areas of some regions. Snow falls in the mountains of the states of Rio Grande do
Sul, Santa Catarina, and Paraná and it is possible but very rare in the states of São Paulo, Rio de
Janeiro, Minas Gerais, and Espírito Santo. The cities of Belo Horizonte and Brasília have
moderate temperatures, usually between 15 and 30 °C (59 and 86 °F), because of their elevation
of approximately 1,000 metres (3,281 ft). Rio de Janeiro, Recife, and Salvador on the coast have
warm climates, with average temperatures of each month ranging from 23 to 27 °C (73 to 81 °F),
but enjoy constant trade winds. The cities of São Paulo, Curitiba, Florianópolis and Porto Alegre
have a subtropical climate similar to that of southern United States, and temperatures can fall
below freezing in winter.
Precipitation levels vary widely. Most of Brazil has moderate rainfall of between 1,000 and
1,500 mm (39 and 59 in) a year, with most of the rain falling in the summer (between December
and April) south of the Equator. The Amazon region is notoriously humid, with rainfall generally
more than 2,000 mm (79 in) per year and reaching as high as 3,000 mm (118 in) in parts of the
western Amazon and near Belém. It is less widely known that, despite high annual precipitation,
the Amazon rain forest has a three- to five-month dry season, the timing of which varies
according to location north or south of the equator.
High and relatively regular levels of precipitation in the Amazon contrast sharply with the
dryness of the semiarid Northeast, where rainfall is highly erratic and there are severe droughts
in cycles averaging seven years. The Northeast is the driest part of the country. The region also
constitutes the hottest part of Brazil, where during the dry season between May and November,
temperatures of more than 38 °C (100 °F) have been recorded. However, the sertão, a region of
semidesert vegetation used primarily for low-density ranching, turns green when there is rain.
Most of the Center-West has 1,500 to 2,000 mm (59 to 79 in) of rain per year, with a pronounced

dry season in the middle of the year, while the South and most of the East is without a distinct
dry season.
3.5.8. Australia
Geographical
Position:
The geography of Australia encompasses
a
wide
variety
of biogeographic regions being the world's smallest continent, while comprising the territory of
the sixth-largest country in the world. The population of Australia is concentrated along the
eastern and south-eastern coasts. The geography of the continent is extremely diverse, ranging
from the snow-capped mountains of the Australian Alps and Tasmania to large deserts, tropical
and temperate forests, grasslands, heathlands and woodlands.
The GPS coordinates of Australia are comprised of a latitude of 25.2744° S and a longitude of
133.7751° E. The combination of these two coordinates mean that Australia is located in the
southern hemisphere as well as the eastern hemisphere.
General Climate: Due to the huge size of the continent, Australia has several different climate
zones. The northern section of Australia has a more tropical influenced climate, hot and humid
in the summer, and quite warm and dry in the winter, while the southern parts are cooler with
mild summers and cool, sometimes rainy winters.
The seasons are the opposite of those in the Northern Hemisphere-when it's summer in the north,
it's winter south of the equator. December and January are the hottest months in Australia, July
and August the coldest.
The southern areas of the Australian Continent are generally more temperate to warm, with
summer daytime temperatures usually between 25 and 30°C and winter Temperatures between
5 and 10°C The Tasmanian mountains and the "Australian Alps" in the southeast of Australia
have a typical mountain climate; the winter can be very harsh there, and the highest peaks are
usually covered by snow year-round.
Another extreme, but completely different are the conditions in the desert and bush areas in
central Australia; the temperature reaches sometimes 50°C and more, and rain may not fall for
years. Most rain falls in the northeastern coastal parts of Australia (Darvin), with an annual
average of 100 inches and more. Sometimes tropical cyclones can occur in the northern coastal
areas, causing heavy wind and rainstorms; these storms usually occur in the Southern summer
months between November and April. Extratropical storms can occur in the southern coastal
areas during this time. [http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/reports/climate/Australia.htm]
3.6. Pests of Citrus in Exporting Countries
The availability of insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds and other pests associated with citrus
in exporting countries such as India, Thailand, China, Bhutan, Egypt, South Africa, Brazil and
Australia was critically reviewed after collecting information from various secondary sources.
The list of these citrus pests has been categorically furnished separately for each of exporting
countries in the following sub-headings:
3.6.1. India
3.6.1.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus

A total of 18 arthropod pests of citrus has been reported for India, out of which 15 were insect
pests and one was mite pest. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported for India
through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.1 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.1: Insect and mite pests of citrus in India
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Lemon butterfly
Papilio demoleus
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
Choudhuri and Konar
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Thakre and Soni
Swallowtail butterfly
Papilio polytes
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus leaf roller
Psorosticha zizyphi
Depressariidae
Lepidoptera
Wikipedia (2021)
Bark and stem borer/
Bark eating caterpillar
Indarbela quadrinotata
Metarbelidae
Lepidoptera
Beccaloni et al. (2003)
Citrus red scale
Aonidiella aurantii
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Hayes (1970)
Citrus yellow scale
Aonidiella citrina
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Wikipedia (2021)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
Srinivasnaik et al.
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Liviidae
Hemiptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Singh et al. (2020)
Citrus whitefly
Dialeurodes citri
Aleyrodidae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Striped mealybug
Ferrisia virgata
Pseudococcidae
Homoptera
Newstead (1894)
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
Akbar et al. (2019)
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Kumar and Rachana
California Citrus
thrips
Scirtothrips citri
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
EPPO (2000)
B. Mite pests
Citrus red mite
Panonychus citri
Tetranychidae
Acarida
EPPO (2022)
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarida
EPPO (2022)
Citrus bud mite
Aceria Sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarida
EPPO (2022)

3.6.1.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 21 diseases of citrus has been reported in India, out of which 11 were fungal diseases,
2 bacterial, 3 viral and 3 nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as reported in India
through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.2 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.2: Diseases of citrus in India
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungus
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Sharma et al. (2013)
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
Srivastava (1982)
Gummosis
Phytophthora
citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
ICAR (2010)
Sooty mould
Capnodium citri
Capnodiaceae
Caapnodiales
EPPO (2022)
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Leaf spot
Meliola mengiferae
Meliolaceae
Meliolales
EPPO (2022)
Powdery
mildew
Oidium sp.
Erysiphaceae
Erysiphales
Kiss et al. (2001)

Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Pink disease
Botryobasidium
salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
EPPO (2022)
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
EPPO (2022)
Black spot of
citrus
Phyllosticta citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaeriale
s
Das et al. (2018)
B. Causal Organism: Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonas citri pv.
citri
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadale
s
Savitha et al. (2016)
Citrus
greening
Candidatus Liberibacter
asiaticus
Phyllobacteriaceae
Rhizobiales
Singh et al. (2019)
C. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Singh et al. (2022)
Citrus
exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Indian citrus
ringspot virus
Indian citrus ringspot
virus
Alphaflexiviridae
Tymovirales
CABI/EPPO (2015)
D. Causal Organism: Nematodes
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root lesion
Hoplolaimus indicus
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
Sundararaju (2006)
Root decay
Tylenchus semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO (2013)

3.6.1.3. Weeds of citrus
There were three weeds of citrus has been reported in India namely Asthma weed, sensitive plant
and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.3 with their common name,
scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.3: Weeds of citrus in India
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Weeds
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Nayak and Babu (2019)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Borah et al. (2018)
Dove weed
Murdannia nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Govaerts (2017)

3.6.2. Thailand
3.6.2.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 11 arthropod pests of citrus has been reported in Thailand, out of which 10 were insect
pests and one was mite pest. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in Thailand
through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.4 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.4: Insect and mite pests of citrus in Thailand
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Lemon butterfly
Papilio demoleus
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
Waterhouse (1993)
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Waterhouse (1993)
Swallowtail butterfly
Papilio polytes
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
CABI/EPPO (1999)

Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Liviidae
Hemiptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Maciel (2015)
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
Haq et al. (2016)
Citrus whitefly
Dialeurodes citri
Aleyrodidae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Toda et al. (2014)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera aurantii
Aphididae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
B. Mite pests
Citrus red mite
Panonychus citri
Tetranychidae
Acarida
EPPO (2022)

3.6.2.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 13 diseases of citrus have been reported in Thailand, out of which 7 were fungal
diseases, one bacterial, two viral and three nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as
reported in Thailand through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the
following Table-3.5 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and
reference.
Table-3.5: Diseases of citrus in Thailand
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Weir et al. (2012)
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
EPPO (2022)
Gummosis
Phytophthora citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
EPPO (2022)
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Powdery mildew
Oidium sp.
Erysiphaceae
Erysiphales
Kiss et al. (2001)
Pink disease
Botryobasidium
salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
EPPO (2022)
B. Causal Organism: Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonas citri pv. citri
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadales
EPPO (2022)
C. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Brunt et al.
Citrus exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO
D. Causal Organism: Nematodes
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Tylenchus semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)

3.6.2.3. Weeds of citrus
There were two weeds of citrus has been reported in Thailand namely Asthma weed, sensitive
plant and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.6 with their common
name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.6: Weeds of citrus in Thailand
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Weeds
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Holm et al. (1979)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Moody (1989)
Dove weed
Murdannia nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
USDA-ARS (2017)

3.6.3. China
3.6.3.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 15 arthropod pests of citrus have been reported in China, out of which 15 were insect
pests and two was mite pest. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in China
through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.7 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.7: Insect and mite pests of citrus in China
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Lemon butterfly
Papilio demoleus
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
Tong (1993)
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Gao et al. (2012)
Swallowtail butterfly
Papilio polytes
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus longhorn beetle
Anoplophora chinensis
Cerambycidae
Coleoptera
Yang et al. (2021)
Citrus yellow scale
Aonidiella citrina
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Wikipedia (2021)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
CABI and EPPO
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Triozidae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Maciel (2015)
Citrus whitefly
Dialeurodes citri
Aleyrodidae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera citricida
Aphididae
Homoptera
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
Seebens et al.
Mediterranean fruit
fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitata
Tephritidae
Diptera
CABI and EPPO
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Mirab-Balou et al.
California Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips citri
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Li et al. (2003)
B. Mite pests
Citrus red mite
Panonychus citri
Tetranychidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarina
Tropea Garzia and
De Lillo (2018)

3.6.3.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 22 diseases of citrus have been reported in China, out of which 12 were fungal diseases,
two bacterial, two viral and 6 nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as reported in
China through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-
3.8 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.

Table-3.8: Diseases of citrus in China
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Mo et al. (2018)
Die-back
Fusarium solani
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
Xu et al. (2016)
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
Zhang and Huang (1990)

Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Gummosis
Phytophthora
citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
Hou et al. (2014)
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Mycosphaerellacea
e
Capnodiales
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Powdery
mildew
Oidium sp.
Erysiphaceae
Erysiphales
Kiss et al. (2001)
Pink disease
Botryobasidium
salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
EPPO (2022)
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
Stem-end rot
Lasiodiplodia
pseudotheobromae
Botryosphaeriaceae
Botryosphaeriales
Black spot of
citrus
Phyllosticta
citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaeriales
Zhang and Huang (1990)
B. Causal Organism: Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonas citri
pv. citri
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadales
Ye et al. (2013)
Citrus
greening
Candidatus
Liberibacter asiaticus
Phyllobacteriaceae
Rhizobiales
Qian WenJuan et al.
C. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Cheng et al. (2011)
Citrus
exocortis
Citrus exocortis
viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO (2013)
D. Causal Organism: Nematode
Root lesion
Hoplolaimus indicus
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Stem injury
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Anguinidae
Tylenchida
Seebens et al. (2017)
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Tylenchus
semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO (2013)

3.6.3.3. Weeds of citrus
There were two weeds of citrus has been reported in China namely Asthma weed, sensitive plant
and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.9 with their common name,
scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.9: Weeds of citrus in China
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Mukhtar and Peer (2017)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Flora of China Editorial
Committee (2017)
Dove weed
Murdannia nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales

3.6.4. Bhutan
3.6.4.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 7 arthropod pests of citrus have been reported in Bhutan, out of which all were insect
pests. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in Bhutan through the review of

secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.10 with their common name,
scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.10: Insect pests of citrus in Bhutan
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Lemon butterfly
Papilio demoleus
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
NHM (1891)
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Liviidae
Hemiptera
Lama and Amatya (1993)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Maciel (2015)
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Swallowtail butterfly
Papilio polytes
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera aurantii
Aphididae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)

3.6.4.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 5 diseases of citrus have been reported in Bhutan, out of which 2 were fungal diseases,
one bacterial, one viral and one nemic disease. The available diseases of citrus as reported in
Bhutan through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-
3.11 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.11: Diseases of citrus in Bhutan
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungi
Powdery mildew
Oidium sp.
Erysiphaceae
Erysiphales
Kiss et al. (2001)
Black spot of citrus
Phyllosticta citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaeriales
EPPO (2022)
B. Causal Organism: Bacteria
Citrus greening
Candidatus sp.
Liberibacter asiaticus
Phyllobacteriaceae
Rhizobiales
Donovan et al. (2012)
C. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Ghosh et al. (2020)
D. Causal Organism: Nematode
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)

3.6.4.3. Weeds of citrus
There were two weeds of citrus has been reported in Bhutan namely Asthma weed, sensitive
plant and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.12 with their common
name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.12: Weeds of citrus in Bhutan
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Weed
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Seebens et al. (2017)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Seebens et al. (2017)
Dove weed
Murdannia
nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Noltie (1994)
3.6.5. Egypt
3.6.5.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 5 arthropod pests of citrus have been reported in Egypt, out of which 4 were insect
pests and one was mite pest. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in Egypt

through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.13 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.13: Insect and mite pests of citrus in Egypt
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis
citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
Adly et al. (2016)
Mediterranean fruit
fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitata
Tephritidae
Diptera
Kourti et al.
South African citrus
thrips
Scirtothrips
aurantia
Thripidae
Thysanoptera Agamy et al.
B. Mite pest
Citrus bud mite
Aceria Sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)

3.6.5.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 12 diseases of citrus has been reported in Egypt, out of which 5 were fungal diseases,
one bacterial, one viral and one nemic disease. The available diseases of citrus as reported in
Egypt through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-
3.14 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.14: Diseases of citrus in Egypt
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungi
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
EPPO (2022)
Gummosis
Phytophthora
citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
EPPO (2022)
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella
citri
Mycosphaerellaceae Capnodiales
CABI/EPPO
B. Causal Organism: Bacteria
Citrus
stubborn
Spiroplasma citri
Mycoplasmataceae
Mycoplasmatales
CABI and EPPO
C. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus
Tristeza Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Amin et al. (2006)
Citrus
exocortis
Citrus exocortis
viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO
D. Causal Organism: Nematode
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Tylenchus
semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
Ibrahim and
Handoo (2016)
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus
sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO

3.6.6. South Africa

3.6.6.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 12 arthropod pests of citrus have been reported in South Africa, out of which 9 were
insect pests and three were mite pests. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported
in South Africa through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following
Table-3.15 with their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.15: Insect and mite pests of citrus in South Africa
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus red scale
Aonidiella aurantia
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Bedford (1998)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
CABI/EPPO (1999)
African citrus
psyllid
Trioza erytreae
Triozidae
Homoptera
Massonie et al. (1976)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Akrivou et al. (2021)
South African
citrus thrips
Scirtothrips aurantia
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Bara and Laing (2019)
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
IPPC (2020)
Mediterranean fruit
fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitata
Tephritidae
Diptera
Munro (1929)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera aurantia
Aphididae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
B. Mite pests
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarida
Garzia and Lillo (2018)
Citrus bud mite
Aceria Sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarida
EPPO (2022)
Lewis spider mite
Eotetranychus lewisi
Tetranychidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)

3.6.6.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 8 diseases of citrus have been reported in South Africa, out of which 4 were fungal
diseases, one viral and three nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as reported in South
Africa through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-
3.16 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.16: Diseases of citrus in South Africa
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal Organism: Fungus
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
EPPO (2022)
Gummosis
Phytophthora
citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
Villiers and Milne (1975)
Black spot of
citrus
Phyllosticta
citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaeriales
Martinez-Minaya et al.
B. Causal Organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Read and Pietersen (2017)
C. Causal Organism: Nematodes
Stem injury
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Anguinidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Tylenchus
semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)

3.6.6.3. Weeds of citrus

There were three weeds of citrus have been reported in South Africa namely Asthma weed,
sensitive plant and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.17 with their
common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.17: Weeds of citrus in South Africa
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Weeds
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Holm et al. (1979)
Sensitive
plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Wells et al. (1986)
Dove weed
Murdannia
nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Holm et al. (1977)

3.6.7. Brazil
3.6.7.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 10 arthropod pests of citrus have been reported in Brazil, out of which 7 were insect
pests and three were mite pests. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in Brazil
through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.18 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.18: Insect and mite pests of citrus in Brazil
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Jaciani et al. (2009)
Citrus red scale
Aonidiella aurantia
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Ebeling (1959)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
Lopes et al. (2019)
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Triozidae
Homoptera
Nava et al. (2007)
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Gomes et al. (2019)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera citricida
Aphididae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Dias-Pini et al. (2018)
B. Mite pests
Citrus red mite
Panonychus citri
Tetranychidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)
Citrus bud mite
Aceria sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)

3.6.7.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 19 diseases of citrus have been reported in Brazil, out of which 10 were fungal diseases,
two bacterial, two viral and 5 nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as reported in
Brazil through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-
3.19 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.19: Diseases of citrus in Brazil
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal organism: Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Lima et al. (2013)
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
EPPO (2022)

Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Gummosis
Phytophthora
citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
Mendes et al.
Sooty mould
Capnodium citri
Capnodiaceae
Caapnodiales
EPPO (2022)
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Mycosphaerellaceae
Capnodiales
CABI/EPPO
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Pink disease
Botryobasidium
salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
EPPO (2022)
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
EPPO (2022)
Black spot of citrus
Phyllosticta citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaeriales
Sposito et al.
B. Causal organism: Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonas citri pv.
citri
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadales
Lin et al. (2012)
Citrus variegated
chlorosis
Xylella fastidiosa
subsp. Pauca
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadales
Coletta-Filho et
al. (2016)
C. Causal organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Loeza-Kuk et al.
Citrus exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO
D. Causal organism: Nematode
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
Lima et al. (2013)
Stem injury
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Anguinidae
Tylenchida
Subbotin et al.
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Tylenchus
semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO

3.6.7.3. Weeds of citrus
There were three weeds of citrus has been reported in Brazil namely Asthma weed, sensitive
plant and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.20 with their common
name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.

Table-3.20: Weeds of citrus in Brazil
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Lopes et al. (2019)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Lopes et al. (2019)
Dove weed
Murdannia nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Aona and Pellegrini (2015)

3.6.8. Australia
3.6.8.1. Insect and mite pests of citrus
A total of 37 arthropod pests of citrus has been reported in Australia, out of which 36 were insect
pests and one was mite pest. The available insect and mite pests of citrus as reported in Australia

through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the following Table-3.21 with
their common name, scientific name, family, order and reference.
Table-3.21: Insect and mite pests of citrus in Australia
Common name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Insect pests
Citrus leaf miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Diez et al. (2006)
Citrus leaf folder
Psorosticha zizyphi
Depressariidae
Lepidoptera
Prins and Prins (2014)
Orange spined bug
Biprorulus bibax
Pentatomidae
Coleoptera
James (1990)
Citrus red scale
Aonidiella aurantii
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Ebeling (1959)
Citrus yellow scale
Aonidiella citrina
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Wikipedia (2021)
Citrus mealybug
Planococcus citri
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
Seebens et al. (2017)
Asian citrus psyllid
Diaphorina citri
Triozidae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Black citrus aphid
Toxoptera citricida
Aphididae
Homoptera
EPPO (2022)
Mediterranean fruit
fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitata
Tephritidae
Diptera
Gasparich et al. (1997)
Queensland fruit fly
Bactrocera tryoni
Tephritidae
Diptera
EPPO (2022)
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
EPPO (2022)
South African citrus
thrips
Scirtothrips aurantii
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Mound and Tree (2020)
B. Mite pests
Citrus red mite
Panonychus citri
Tetranychidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)
Citrus bud mite
Aceria sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarina
EPPO (2022)

3.6.8.2. Diseases of citrus
A total of 18 diseases of citrus have been reported in Australia, out of which 10 were fungal
diseases, one bacterial, two viral and 5 nemic diseases. The available diseases of citrus as
reported in Australia through the review of secondary documents has been presented in the
following Table-3.22 with their common name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and
reference.
Table-3.22: Diseases of citrus in Australia
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
A. Causal organism: Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Shivas et al. (2016)
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
Bertus (1981)
Gummosis
Phytophthora citrophthora
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
EPPO (2022)
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
Jeffress et al. (2020)
Sooty mould
Capnodium citri
Capnodiaceae
Caapnodiales
EPPO (2022)
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Mycosphaerellac
eae
Capnodiales
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Black mould
Aspergillus niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
EPPO (2022)
Pink disease
Botryobasidium salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
Black spot of
citrus
Phyllosticta citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaerial
es
Paul et al. (2005)
B. Causal organism: Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonas citri pv. citri
Xanthomonadace
ae
Xanthomonadal
es
EPPO (2022)
C. Causal organism: Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Brlansky et al.

Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Citrus
exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
CABI/EPPO (2013)
D. Causal organism: Nematode
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Stem injury
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Anguinidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
Zeng et al. (2012)
Root decay
Tylenchus semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
EPPO (2022)
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
CABI/EPPO (2013)

3.6.8.3. Weeds of citrus
There were three weeds of citrus have been reported in Australia namely Asthma weed, Sensitive
plant and dove weed those have been presented in the following Table-3.23 with their common
name, scientific name, family, order, pest status and reference.
Table-3.23: Weeds of citrus in Australia
Common
name
Scientific name
Family name
Order name
Reference
Asthma weed
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Seebens et al. (2017)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Seebens et al. (2017)
Dove weed
Murdannia nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Atlas of Living Australia (2017)

3.7. References
Abbas, M., Khan, M.M., Mughal, S.M. and Ji, P. (2015). Comparison of infection of Citrus tristeza
closterovirus in Kinnow mandarin (Citrus reticulata) and Mosambi sweet orange (Citrus
sinensis) in Pakistan. Crop Protection. 78: 146-150.
Adly, D., Fadl, H.A.A.A. and Mousa, S.F.M. (2016). Survey and seasonal abundance of mealybug
species, their parasitoids and associated predators on guava trees in Egypt. Egy. J. Biol. Pest Con.
26(3): 657-664. http://www.ejbpc.com/
Agamy, E., El-Husseini, M., El- Sebaey, I. and Wafy, M. (2017). The Egyptian Thripid species in olive
groves at Ismaialia, Egypt. Egy. Aca. J. Biol. Sci. A. Entom. 10(4): 1-17. doi:
10.21608/eajb.2017.12180
Akbar, S.A., Nabi, S.U., Mansoor, S. and Khan, K.A, (2019). Morpho-molecular identification and a new
host report of Bactrocera dorsalis (Hendel) from the Kashmir valley (India). Inter. J. Trop. Insect
Sci. 40(2): 315-325. DOI:10.1007/s42690-019-00083-w
Akrivou, A., Georgopoulou, I., Papachristos, D., Milonasm, P.G. and Kriticos, D.J. (2021). Potential
global distribution of Aleurocanthus woglumi considering climate change and irrigation. PLoS
ONE. 16(12): e0261626. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261626
Ali, S.I. (1973). Mimosaceae. In: Flora of West Pakistan, 36 [ed. by Nasir E, Ali SI]. 1-41.
Amin, H.A., Fonseca, F., Santos, C. and Nolasco, G. (2006). Typing of Egyptian Citrus tristeza virus
(CTV) isolates based on the capsid protein gene. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 45(1): 10-14.
Aona, L.Y.S. and Pellegrini, M.O.O. (2015). (Commelinaceae in Lista de Espécies da Flora do Brasil).,
Jardim Botânico do Rio de Janeiro. http://floradobrasil.jbrj.gov.br/jabot/floradobrasil/FB3481
Archana, L. and Kurl, S. P. (2020). Identification of aphid species (Homoptera : Aphididae) of economic
importance from Delhi and its NCR using DNA barcodes and PCR-SSR based approach. Journal
of Experimental Zoology, India, 23(2) 1791-1797.
Arshad, M., Ullah, M.I., Çagatay, N.S., Dikmen, F., Abdullah, A. and Afzal, M. (2019). Cordia myxa L.,
a new host plant record for Asian citrus psyllid, Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. Southwestern
Entom. 44(1): 331-334. DOI:10.3958/059.044.0137
Bara, G.T. and Laing, M.D. (2019). Determination of the natural host status of avocado fruit to pestiferous
thrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Afr. Entom. 27(1): 245-253.
https://doi.org/10.4001/003.027.0245

Beccaloni, G., Scoble, M., Kitching, I., Simonsen, T., Robinson, G., Pitkin, B., Hine, A. and Lyal, C.
(2003). Indarbela quadrinotata. The Global Lepidoptera Names Index. Nat. His. Museum.
Retrieved May 7, 2018.
Bedford, E.C.G. (1998). Red scale Aonidiella auranii (Maskell). In: Citrus pests in the Republic of South
Africa. Bedford, E.C.G., Berg, M.A.V. and Villiers, E.A.D. Dynamic Ad., Nelspruit, South
Africa. pp: 132–134.
Bertus, A.L. (1981). Australasian Plant Pathology. 10(3): 53-55.
Borah, T. R., Dutta, S. and Barman, A. R. (2018). First report of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum on Mimosa
pudica in India. New Disease Reports. 14. DOI:10.5197/j.2044-0588.2018.038.014
Brlansky, R.H., Howd, D.S., Broadbent, P. and Damsteegt, V.D. (2002). Histology of Sweet Orange Stem
Pitting Caused by an Australian Isolate of Citrus tristeza virus. Plant Disease. 86(10): 1169-1174.
Brunt, A., Crabtree, K., Dallwitz, M., Gibbs, A. and Watson, L. (1996). Viruses of plants, 409-411. CAB
International, Wallingford, UK.
CABI, EPPO. (1999). Planococcus citri. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK: CAB International. Map 43. DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20066600043
CABI/EPPO. (2013). Bactrocera dorsalis. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK:
CABI and EPPO. (2015). Spiroplasma citri. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK:
Cheng, X.F., Wu, J.X., Ma, X.Y., Fu, H.F. and Wu, X.Y. (2011). First report of Citrus tristeza virus in
Citrus changshanensis cv. Huyou in Zhejiang, China. Journal of Plant Pathology. 93(4S): S4.68.
Choudhuri, S. and Konar, A. (2007). Population build up of lepidopteran insects on pummelo (Citrus
grandis L.) in alluvial zone of West Bengal. J. Entomol. Res. 31(2): 97-99.
Coletta-Filho, H.D., Francisco, C.S., Lopes, J.R.S., Oliveira, A.F. and Silva, L.F.O. (2016). First report
of olive leaf scorch in Brazil, associated with Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca. Phytopathologia
Mediterranea. 55(1): 130-135.
Das, A.K., Nerkar, S. and Kumar, A. (2018). First report of Phyllosticta citricarpa causing citrus black
spot on Citrus sinensis and C. reticulata in India. Plant Disease. 102(8): 1661.
Dias-Pini, N.S., Lima, M.G.A., Lima, E.F.B., Maciel, G.P.S. and Duarte, P.M. (2018). Scirtothrips
dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae): a newly introduced polyphagous pest in northeastern Brazil.
Neotrop. Entom. 47(5): 725-728. DOI:10.1007/s13744-018-0618-3
Diez, P.A., Peña, J.E. and Fidalgo, P. (2006). Population dynamics of Phyllocnistis citrella (Lepidoptera:
Gracillariidae) and its parasitoids in Tafí Viejo, Tucumán, Argentina. Florida Entom. 89(3): 328-
335. DOI:10.1653/0015-4040(2006)89[328:PDOPCL]2.0.CO;2
Donovan, N.J., Beattie, G.A.C., Chambers, G.A., Holford, P., Englezou, A., Hardy, S., Dorjee, Wangdi,
P., Thinlay, and Om, N. (2012). First report of 'Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus' in Diaphorina
communis.
Australasian
Plant
Disease
Notes.
7(1):
1-4.
http://rd.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13314-011-0031-9/fulltext.html
DOI:10.1007/s13314-
011-0031-9
Ebeling, W. (1959). Subtropical Fruit Pests. University of California, Los Angeles. 436 pp.
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Flora of China Editorial Committee. (2017). Flora of China. In: Flora of China. St. Louis, Missouri and
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: Missouri Botanical Garden and Harvard University Herbaria.
http://www.efloras.org/flora_page.aspx?flora_id=2
Gao, J.Y., Jun, G., Wang, Z.R., Zhou, D.G., Peng, M.X. and Yue, J.Q. (2012). Study on insect pest species
and occurrence rule of main species in Dehong lemon orchard of Yunnan province. Acta
Agriculturae Jiangxi. 24(6): 70-73. http://www.jxnyxb.com
Garzia, T.G. and Lillo, D.E. (2018). Geographic distribution of Phyllocoptruta oleivora in the
Mediterranean Basin, with particular emphasis on Italy. Syst. App. Acarology. 23: 1021-1023.
Gasparich, G.E., Silva, J.G., Han, H.Y., McPheron, B.A., Steck, G.J. and Sheppard, W.S. (1997).
Population genetic structure of Mediterranean fruit fly (Diptera: Tephritidae) and implications
for worldwide colonization patterns. Annals of the Entomological Society of America. 90 (6),
790-797. DOI:10.1093/aesa/90.6.790
Ghosh, D.K., Kokane, A., Kokane, S., Tenzin, J., Gubyad, M.G., Wangdi, P., Murkute, A.A., Sharma,
A.K. and Gowda, S. (2020). Detection and molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus

Liberibacter asiaticus’ and Citrus tristeza virus associated with citrus decline in Bhutan.
Phytopathology (early view). https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-07-20-0266-R
Gomes, A.M.S.V., Reis, F.O., Lemos, R.N.S., Mondego, J.M., Braun, H. and Araujo, J.R.G. (2019).
Physiological characteristics of citrus plants infested with citrus blackfly. Revista Brasileira de
Entom. 63(2): 119–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbe.2019.02.002
Govaerts, R. (2017). World Checklist of Commelinaceae. Richmond, UK: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
http://apps.kew.org/wcsp/
Haq, I., Vreysen, M.J.B., Schutze, M., Hendrichs, J. and Shelly, T. (2016). Effects of methyl eugenol
feeding on mating compatibility of Asian population of Bactrocera dorsalis (Diptera:
Tephritidae) with African population and with B. carambolae. J. Econ. Entom. 109(1): 148-153.
http://jee.oxfordjournals.org/content/109/1/148
Hayes, W. B. (1970). Fruit growing in India. Third edition. Kitabistan, Allahabad. 512 pp.
Holm, L.R., Plucknett, D.L., Panco, J.V. and Herberger, J.P. (1977). The World's Worst Weeds:
Distribution and Biology., Honolulu, USA: University Press of Hawaii.
Holm, L.G., Pancho, J.V., Herberger, J.P. and Plucknett, D.L. (1979). A geographical atlas of world
weeds. New York, USA: John Wiley and Sons, 391 pp.
Hou, X., Huang, F., Zhang, T., Xu, J., Hyde, D.K. and Li, H. (2014). Pathotypes and Genetic Diversity
of Chinese Collections of Elsinoë fawcettii Causing Citrus Scab. J. Inte. Agri. 13(6): 1293-1302.
Ibrahim, I.K.A. and Handoo, Z.A. (2016). Occurrence of phytoparasitic nematodes on some crop plants
in northern Egypt. Pakistan Journal of Nematology. 34(2): 163-169.
ICAR. (2010). Annual Report 2009-10, ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Meghalaya.
IPPC. (2020). Eradication of Bactrocera dorsalis (Oriental Fruit Fly) in three separate areas in the Eastern
Cape Province of South Africa. In: IPPC Official Pest Report, Rome, Italy: FAO.
https://www.ippc.int/
Jaciani, F.J., Destéfano, S.A.L., Neto, R.J. and Belasque, J.J. (2009). Detection of a new bacterium related
to Xanthomonas fuscans subsp. aurantifolii infecting Swingle citrumelo in Brazil. Plant Dis.
93(10): 1074. DOI:10.1094/PDIS-93-10-1074B
James, D.G. (1990). Incidence of egg parasitism of Biprorulus bibax Breddin (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae)
in southern New South Wales and northern Victoria. Gen. App. Entom. 22: 55-60.
Jeffress, S., Arun-Chinnappa, K., Stodart, B., Vaghefi, N., Tan, Y.P. and Ash, G. (2020). Genome mining
of the citrus pathogen Elsinoë fawcettii; prediction and prioritisation of candidate effectors, cell
wall degrading enzymes and secondary metabolite gene clusters. PLoS One 15(5):e0227396.
Khan, A., Khanzada, K.A., Shaukat, S.S. and Shahzad, S. (2007). Nematodes associated with onion in
Sindh, Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of Nematology. 25(2): 291-294.
Kiss, L., Cook, R.T.A., Saenz, G.S., Cunnington, J.H., Takamatsu, S., Pascoe, I., Bardin, M., Nicot, P.C.,
Sato, Y.; Rossman, A. Y. (2001). Mycological Research. 105(6): 684-697.
Kumar, P.S. and Rachana, R.R. (2021). Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) is a pest of celery,
Apium graveolens (Apiales: Apiaceae): first report and diagnostic characters. Journal of
Integrated Pest Management. 12 (46), DOI:10.1093/jipm/pmab039
Lama, T.K. and Amatya, P. (1993). Survey of the Incidence of Citrus Greening Disease and its Psylla
Vector in Nepal and Bhutan. J. Inter. Org. Citrus Vir. Con. Proc. (1957-2010). 12(2): 445-446.
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hk8p4cb DOI:10.5070/C56hk8p4cb
Li, X., Li, W., Guo, F. and Lai, B. (2003). The damage of thrips to the Navel orange fruit and its control.
South China Fruits. 32: 21-21.
Lima, N.B., Batista, A.M.V., Morais, M.A., Jr., Barbosa, M.A.G., Michereff, S.J., Hyde, K.D. and
Câmara, M.P.S. (2013). Five Colletotrichum species are responsible for mango anthracnose in
northeastern Brazil. Fungal Divers. 61: 75-88.
Lin, H.C., Feng, C.Y., Chang, Y.A. and Chang, H. (2012). Molecular typing and genetic characterization
of pathogenic variants of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri in Taiwan. J. Phytopath. 160(9):
475-483.
Lopes, F.S.C., Oliveira, J.V., Oliveira, J.E.M., Oliveira, M.D. and Souza, A.M. (2019). Host plants for
mealybugs (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae) in grapevine crops. Pesquisa Agropecuária Trop.
DOI:10.1590/1983-40632019v4954421
Loeza-Kuk, E., Ochoa-Martínez, D.L., Mora-Aguilera, G., Rivas-Valencia, P., Gutiérrez-Espinosa,
M.A., Cintra, J.J.W., Villegas-Monter, Á., Arno-Wulff, N. and Perez-Molphe-Balch, E. (2008).
Detection of Citrus sudden death-associated virus and Haplotypes of Citrus tristeza virus in

Toxoptera citricida and Aphis spiraecola and implication on citrus sudden death in Brazil.
Agrociencia, 42(6): 669-678.
Lvovsky, and Fallahzadeh. (2010). Psorosticha zizyphi (Lepidoptera: Dressariidae) is newly recorded
from Iran. Far Eastern Entom. (N.216): 14-16.
Maciel. (2015). Status sanitário da mosca negra dos citros no Brasil. Dissertação (Mestrado em Defesa
Sanitária Vegetal) - Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, 88 pp.
Mangrio, W.M., Sahito, H.A., Bhugro, M., Kousar, T., Shah, Z.H. and Jatoi, F.A. (2020). Incidence and
distribution of lemon Butterfly (Papilio demoleus L.) on five alternate Citrus hosts at Sahati
region, Sindh-Pakistan. Pure App. Bio. 9(4): 2637-2647. DOI:10.19045/bspab.2020.90280
Martinez-Minaya, J., Conesa, D., Lopez-Quilez, A. and Vicent, A. (2015). Climatic distribution of citrus
black spot caused by Phyllosticta citricarpa. A historical analysis of the disease spread in South
Africa. European Journal of Plant Pathology. 143(1): 69-83.
Mehsud, A., Mehmood, S., Muhammad, A., Khan, R. U., Khan, S. U., Khan, H. U., Wazir, R. and
Hussain, Z. (2013). Morphology and anatomy of some weeds from flora of District Bannu,
Pakistan.
Pakistan
Journal
of
Weed
Science
Research.
(4),
437-445.
http://www.wssp.org.pk/vol-19-4-2013/7.%20PJWSR-23-2013-19-4-437-445.pdf
Mendes, M.A.S., Dianese, J.C. and Urben, A. (2019). Fungos em Plants no Brasil. 2a Edição ampliada e
revisada. – Brasília, DF: Escola Nacional de Gestão Agropecuária, 970 pages.
Mirab-Balou, M., Tong, X.L. and Chen, X.X. (2014). Thrips species diversity in urban green spaces of
Hangzhou
(Zhejiang
Province),
China.
J.
Entomol.
Acarol.
Res.
46(3):
85-89.
DOI:10.4081/jear.2014.1828
Mo, J., Zhao, G., Li, Q., Soalngi, G.S., Tang, L., Huang, S., Guo, T. and Hsiang, T. (2018). Identification
and characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with mango anthracnose in Guangxi,
China. Plant Dis. 102: 1283-1289.
Moody, K. (1989). Weeds reported in rice in South and Southeast Asia., Los Banos, Philippines: IRRI.
Mound, L.A. and Tree, D.J. (2020). Thysanoptera australiensis– Thrips of Australia. Lucidcentral.org,
Identic
Pty
Ltd,
Queensland,
Australia.
https://keys.lucidcentral.org/keys/v3/thrips_australia/keys/Thripinae_Australia/key/austhripinae
/Media/Html/Entities/scirtothrips_aurantii.htm
Mukhtar, I. and Peer, A.F. (2017). First report of powdery mildew caused by Podosphaera xanthii on
Euphorbia hirta in China. Plant Disease. 101(7): 1316. DOI:10.1094/PDIS-01-17-0002-PDN
Nayak, A. K. and Babu, B. K. (2019). First report of powdery mildew caused by Podosphaera fusca on
Euphorbia hirta in Odisha state, India. Journal of Plant Pathology. 101 (1): 191-191.
DOI:10.1007/s42161-018-0143-6
Nava, D.E., Torres, M.L.G., Rodrigues, M.D.L., Bento, J.M.S. and Parra, J.R.P. (2007). Biology of
Diaphorina citri (Hem., Psyllidae) on different hosts and at different temperatures. J. App.
Entom. 131(9/10): 709-715. DOI:10.1111/j.1439-0418.2007.01230.x
Newstead, R. (1894). Scale insects in Madras. Indian Museum Notes. 3:21-32.
NHM. (1891). Specimen record from the collection in the Natural History Museum (London, UK).,
London, UK: Natural History Museum (London).
Noltie, H.J. (1994). Flora of Bhutan, Volume 3, Part 1. Edinburgh, UK: Royal Botanic Garden.
Paul, I., van Jaarsveld, A.S., Korsten, L. and Hattingh, V. (2005). The potential global geographical
distribution of Citrus Black Spot caused by Guignardia citricarpa (Kiely): likelihood of disease
establishment in the European Union. Crop Protection. 24(2): 297-308.
Prins, D.J. and Prins, D.W. (2014). Afromoths, online database of Afrotropical moth species
(Lepidoptera). World Wide Web electronic publication (www.afromoths.net) (12 Aug.2014).
Read, D.A. and Pietersen, G. (2017). Diversity of Citrus tristeza virus populations in commercial
grapefruit orchards in Southern Africa, determined using Illumina Mi Seq technology. European
Journal of Plant Pathology. 148(2): 379-391.
Safdar, A., Javed, N., Khan, S.A., Khan, H.U., Rehman, A. and Haq, I. (2010). Survey and investigation
of different citrus growing areas for citrus sudden death syndrome. Pakistan Journal of
Phytopathology. 22(2): 71-78.
Savitha, A.S., Ajithkumar, K., Palaiah, P. and Ramesh, G. (2016). Integrated management of citrus canker
caused by Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse) in acid lime (Citrus auruntifolia). Pest
Manag. Hortil. Ecos. 22(2): 189-192.

Seebens, H., Blackburn, T.M., Dyer, E.E., Genovesi, P., Hulme, P.E., Jeschke, J.M., Pagad, S., Pyšek,
P., Winter, M., Arianoutsou, M., Bacher, S., Blasius, B., Brundu, G., Capinha, C., CelestiGrapow, L., Dawson, W., Dullinger, S., Fuentes, N., Jäger, H., Kartesz, J., Kenis, M., Kreft, H.,
Kühn, I., Lenzner, B., Liebhold, A. and Mosena, A. (2017). No saturation in the accumulation of
alien
species
worldwide.
Nat.
Comm.
8(2):
http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms14435
Sharma, G., Kumar, N., Weir, B.S., Hyde, K.D. and Shenoy, B.D. (2013). The ApMat marker can resolve
Colletotrichum species: A case study with Mangifera indica. Fungal Divers. 61: 117-138.
Shivas, R.G., Tan, Y.P., Edwards, J., Dinh, Q., Maxwell, A., Andjic, V., Liberato, J.R., Anderson, C.,
Beasley, D.R., Bransgrove, K., Coates, L.M., Cowan, K., Daniel, R., Dean, J.R., Lomavatu, M.F.,
Mercado-Escueta, D., Mitchell, R.W., Thangavel, R., Tran-Nguyen, L.T.T. and Weir, B.S.
(2016). Colletotrichum species in Australia. Aus. Plant Pathol. 45: 447-464.
Singh, Y. H., Sharma, S. K., Sinha, B., Baranwal, V. K., Singh, N. B., Chanu, N. T., Roy, S. S., Ansari,
M. A., Ningombam, A., Devi, P. S., Das, A. K., Singh, S., Singh, K. M. and Prakash, N. (2019).
Genetic Variability Based on Tandem Repeat Numbers in a Genomic Locus of ‘Candidatus
Liberibacter asiaticus’ Prevalent in North East India. The Plant Pathology Journal. 35 (6), 644-
653. DOI:10.5423/PPJ.OA.03.2019.0061
Singh, S., Reddy, P.V.R. and Deka, S. (2020). Sucking Pests of Citrus. In: Omkar (ed.) Sucking Pests of
Crops Springer, 515 pp.
Singh, S., Mulani, E., Bhattacharyya, U., Palchoudhury, S., Mazumder, N., Saikia, S., Nath, P.D., Pun,
K.B. and Biswas, K.K. (2022). Decline inducing Citrus tristeza virus-VT/Kpg3 genotype occurs
predominantly in citrus orchards of Northeast India. I Indian Phytopathology. 75: 853–861.
Sposito, M.B., Amorim, L., Bassanezi, R.B., Yamamoto, P.T., Felippe, M.R. and Czermainski, A.B.C.
(2011). Crop Protection. 30(12): 1546-1552.
Srinivasnaik, S., Suganthy, M., Kumar, S.M. and Jegadeeswari, V. (2016). Survey, documentation and
identification of entomofauna of cocoa, Theobroma cacao L. in major cocoa growing regions of
South India. J. App. Nat. Sci. 8(3): 1444-1451. http://jans.ansfoundation.org/previousissues/volume-8-year-2016--issue-3#TOC-Physiological-and-biochemical-response-to-highertemperature-stress-in-hot-pepper-Capsicum-annuum-L.-
Srivastava, R.C. (1982). Ind. J. Mycology Plant Path. 12(2): 244-246.
Subbotin, S.A., Madani, M., Krall, E., Sturhan, D. and Moens, M. (2005). Molecular diagnostics,
taxonomy, and phylogeny of the stem nematode Ditylenchus dipsaci species complex based on
the sequences of the internal transcribed spacer-rDNA. Phytopathology. 95(11): 1308-1315.
DOI:10.1094/PHYTO-95-1308
Sundararaju, P. (2006). Community structure of plant parasitic nematodes in banana plantations of
Andhra Pradesh, India. Indian Journal of Nematology. 36(2): 226-229.
Tayyib, M., Suhail, A., Arif, M.J. and Khan, M.A. (2014). Whiteflies (Aleyrodidae: Homoptera) of
Punjab Pakistan. Pak. Entom. 36(1): 31-34.
Thakre, B. and Soni, U. (2017). Incidence of suitable insecticides for the control of leaf miner
(Phyllcnistis citrella) on Nagpur mandarin at Chhindwara district of Madhya Pradesh, India. Ann.
Plant Sci. 6(7): 1653-1655. DOI:10.21746/aps.2017.07.002
Toda, S., Hirose, T., Kakiuchi, K., Kodama, H., Kijima, K. and Mochizuki, M. (2014). Occurrence of a
novel strain of Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in Japan and development of its
molecular diagnostics. App. Entom. Zoo. 49(2): 231-239. DOI:10.1007/s13355-013-0241-z
Tong, X. (1993). Butterfly fauna of Zhejiang., Hangzhou, China: Zhejiang Science and Technology
Publishers.
Tropea Garzia, G. and De Lillo, E. (2018). Geographic distribution of Phyllocoptruta oleivora in the
Mediterranean Basin, with particular emphasis on Italy. Systematic and Applied Acarology. 23:
1021-1023.
Ullah, F., Gul, R. and Badshah, H. (2005). Efficacy of Five Different Insecticides Against Citrus Leaf
Miner Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton (Lepidoptera; Gracillariidae). J. Entom. 2(1): 25-28.
DOI:10.3923/je.2005.25.28
USDA-ARS. (2017). Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Online Database. In:
Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Online Database. Beltsville, Maryland,
USA:
National
Germplasm
Resources
Laboratory.
https://npgsweb.arsgrin.gov/gringlobal/taxon/taxonomysimple.aspx

Villiers, E.A. and Milne, D.L. (1975) Citrus and Sub-Tropical Fruit Journal No. 503, 5-8.
Waterhouse, D.F. (1993). The major arthropod pests and weeds of agriculture in Southeast Asia.
Canberra, Australia: ACIAR. v + 141 pp.
Weir, B.S., Johnston, P.R. and Damm, U. (2012). The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex.
Stud. Mycol. 73: 115-180.
Wells, M. J., Balsinhas, A. A., Joffe, H., Engelbrecht, V. M., Harding, G. and Stirton, C. H. (1986). A
catalogue of problem plants in southern Africa incorporating the national weed list of South
Africa. Memoirs, Botanical Survey of South Africa. v + 658pp.
WenJuan, Q., Ying, L., YouQing, M., ZunZhong, Y., Liu, W., Rui, W., QiQi, Z., Hui, W. and Jian, W.
(2018). Field detection of citrus huanglongbing associated with 'Candidatus Liberibacter
asiaticus' by recombinase polymerase amplification within 15 min. Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry. 66(22): 5473-5480. DOI:10.1021/acs.jafc.8b01015
Wikipedia. (2021). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aonidiella_citrina#cite_note-ScaleNet-1
Wikipedia. (2021). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psorosticha_zizyphi
Xu, F., Yang, G.Q., Wang, J.M., Song, Y.L., Liu, L.L. and Zhang, J.J. (2016). Composition and variation
in aggressiveness of Fusarium populations causing wheat head blight in Henan Province. Acta
Phytopathol. Sin. 46: 294-303.
Yang, W., FengMao, C., LiChao, W. and Min, L. (2021). Investigation of beetle species that carry the
pine wood nematode, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner and Buhrer) Nickle, in China. J.
Forestry Res. 32(4): 1745-1751. DOI:10.1007/s11676-020-01146-2
Ye, G., Hong, N., Zou, L.F., Zou, H.S., Zakria, M., Wang, G.P. and Chen, G.Y. (2013). Based genetic
diversity of Chinese isolates of the citrus canker pathogen Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri. Plant
Dis. pp: 1187-1194.
Zeng, Y., Ye, W., Tredway, L., Martin, S. and Martin, M. (2012). Taxonomy and morphology of plantparasitic nematodes associated with turfgrasses in North and South Carolina, USA. Zootaxa.
3452: 1-46, DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.210165
Zhang, B.C. and Huang, Y.C. (1990). A list of important plant diseases in China. Rev. Plant Path. 69(3):
97-118.

Chapter 4: Hazard Identification

4.1. Introduction
This chapter outlines the potential hazards associated with citrus in Bangladesh, India, Thailand,
China, Bhutan, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, Australia, etc. and considers some of the major risk
characteristics of the commodity and its hazards.
An initial hazard list was made of all pests and pathogens associated with citrus including
Zara/Colombo Lemon (Citrus medica) found in Bangladesh, India, Thailand, China, Bhutan,
South Africa, Egypt, Brazil, Australia and any other citrus exporting countries of the world. The
PRA study team at first reviewed a report on “Pest Risk Analysis of Citrus in Bangladesh’
conducted in the year 2014 sponsored by “Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh”
Project under Plant Quarantine Wing (PQW), Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE),
Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh. This PRA report had made the list of pests of citrus
including Zara/Colombo Lemon (Citrus medica) those were available in Bangladesh as well as
in the above-mentioned exporting countries of citrus from where Bangladesh usually imports
citrus. The lists of citruses were used as basis for the current PRA of Citrus medica
(Zara/ColomboLemon) in Bangladesh. The list of these citrus pests was later refined and
finalized after adding and/or excluding the pests based on consideration of association with
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemons) as found available in Bangladesh identified through field
survey and secondary sources as well as found in the above-mentioned exporting countries
through literature review. Some hitch-hiker pests are also included in the pest risk analyses,
where entry and establishment of a species into the country would cause potential economic,
environment and/or health consequences. These organisms were also assessed and discarded as
likely hazards based on biology and lack of association with the commodity—here, the Citrus
medica (Zara/ Colombo Lemon). Then all potential hazards identified through primary data
collection survey and literature review were considered for pest risk assessment as well as
recommended necessary management options.
4.2. Potential Hazard Groups
Pests and pathogens identified through primary data collection survey as well as literature review
were grouped in two main ways regarding their association with the commodity—here, the
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties). Under their taxonomic category, i.e., Arthropods
that include insect, mite, etc., Plant Pathogens like Fungi, Bacteria, Virus, Nematode, etc., Herbs
such as field weeds, parasitic weeds, etc., Mollusk such as Slug, Snail, etc., or within the trophic
role, they play in their association, and what structures or part of the plants they attack, e.g.,
surface feeder, internal borer of plant and/or plant parts, seed feeder, pathogen, etc. In this risk
analysis, hazard organisms are grouped according to their general taxonomic category, where a
genus contains more than one species, information on all species is contained within one pest
risk assessment. If organisms that are hitchhikers or vectors this is noted in the individual pest
risk assessment.

The following categories of potential hazards are used are as follows:

A. Arthropod
B. Pathogen
C. Herb
D. Mollusk
• Insect pest
• Mite pest
• Fungi
• Bacteria
• Algae
• Virus
• Nematode
• Weed
• Snail
• Slug

4.3. Interception of Pests on Citrus medica (Zara/ColomboLemon) from Existing Pathways
In the past, there was no previous pest risk assessment on Citrus medica (Zara/ColomboLemon)
in any of the exporting countries including India, China, Thailand, Bhutan, South Africa, Egypt,
Brazil, Australia, etc. from where Bangladesh usually imports citrus. As reported by the Plant
Quarantine Wing (PQW), Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE), Bangladesh, during
inspection in port of entry of citrus in Bangladesh, not a pest had been intercepted yet today on
the citrus imported into Bangladesh from any country of citrus export.
4.4. Review of earlier PRA
The “Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus in Bangladesh” previously conducted in 2015
sponsored by the “Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh (SPCB)” under Plant
Quarantine Wing, Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE), Ministry of Agriculture,
Bangladesh has been considered and reviewed by the current PRA study team. This PRA report
was used as the basis to consider the pest list of citruses including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lemon) as well as to conduct the current study on “PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lemon) in Bangladesh”. As per requirement of the international standard, every five-year
interval to update the pest list, PRA of any commodity need to be updated by the NPPO.
Therefore, the present “PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) in Bangladesh” has been
initiated and conducted.
4.5. Other Risk Characteristics of the Commodity
Although many pests dealt with in this risk analysis have adequate information for assessment,
the PRA study team can’t predict future or present risks that currently escape detection for a
variety of reasons.
4.5.1. Unlisted Pests
These include pests that are not yet identified. With a trend towards decreasing use of chemical
products in agriculture and further reliance on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) strategies it is
assumed that new pests enter the system at some time in the future.
Prolonged use of large doses of pesticides and fertilizers can lead to previously non pest species
becoming economically important through resistance to pest treatments. Any of these types of
organism could initially appear in very small numbers associated with the commodity and may
not be identified as hazards before their impacts become noticeable.

4.5.2. Latent micro-organisms

Pests such as microbes and fungi infect Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) before transit and
may not produce symptoms making them apparent only when they reach a suitable climate to
sporulate or reproduce.
Many fungi can infect Zara/Colombo Lemon after arrival making it difficult to distinguish the
origin of saprobes and pathogens without adequate identification. Consumers tend to throw away
molded Zara/Colombo Lemon rather than take it to a diagnostic laboratory so there is little data
on post entry appearance of “invisible organisms”.
4.6. Assumptions and Uncertainties
The purpose of this section is to summarize the uncertainties and assumptions identified during
the preceding hazard identification and risk assessment stages. An analysis of these uncertainties
and assumptions can then be completed to identify which are critical to the outcomes of the risk
analysis. Critical uncertainties or assumptions are considered for further research with the aim
of reducing uncertainty or removing the assumption. Where there is significant uncertainty in
the estimated risk, a precautionary approach to managing risk may be adopted. In these
circumstances the measures should be consistent with other measures where equivalent
uncertainties exist and be reviewed as soon as additional information becomes available.
There is a major uncertainty concern regarding the prevalence of above mentioned high and
moderately rated insect and mite pests, diseases and weeds or other pests found in Thailand,
India, Pakistan, Australia, the Philippines, etc. and any other Zara/Colombo Lemon exporting
countries of the world.
The assessment should have included information on export volumes and frequency to other
countries, the average size of export lots, the number of lots found infested with pests of citrus
in the importing countries, and preferably, any information on incidence level in pests infested
citrus consignments or lots would be valuable.
Thus, the assessment of uncertainties and assumptions for each organism often covers similar
areas of information or lack of information, with key factors or variables being relevant across
different organism groups. The uncertainties and assumptions are covered in these sections rather
than individually in each pest risk assessment.
4.7. Assumptions and Uncertainties around hazard biology
The biology of insects that have been reared in the laboratory for several generations is often
different to wild counterparts established in greenhouses or in field conditions (Mangan &
Hallman, 1998). Aspects such as life cycle, pre-ovipositional period, fecundity, and flight ability
(Chambers, 1977), as well as cold or heat tolerance can be influenced by the highly controlled
laboratory environment. Laboratory reared insects may differ in their responses to environmental
stress and exhibit tolerances that are exaggerated or reduced when compared with wild relatives.
If a pest species occurs in Bangladesh often its full host range, or behavior in the colonized
environment remains patchy. It is difficult to predict how a species have in a new environment,
particularly if it has not become established as a pest elsewhere outside its natural range.
Therefore, there considerable uncertainty around the likelihood of an organism colonizing new
hosts or the consequences of its establishment and spread on the natural environment. Where

indigenous plants are discussed as potential hosts this is extrapolated from the host range (at
genus and family level) overseas and is not intended as a definitive list.
4.8. Assumption and Uncertainties around the Inspection Procedure
Some uncertainty exists around the efficacy of risk management measures. Interception data is
one way of estimating efficacy, as records of live and dead organisms indicate the success of a
treatment and the thresholds for growth and development of each individual organism. A sample
audit is required to monitor efficacy. Currently this is 600 units of fruit/vegetable product per
consignment. The assumption is that this monitoring will adequately record type and number of
organisms associated with each commodity. The 600-sample inspection requirement to achieve
a 95 percent level of confidence that the maximum pest level will not be exceeded makes
assumptions around consignment homogeneity, that samples will be random, and that the
inspector has a 100 percent likelihood of detecting pests if they are present in the sample. It is
accepted that the sampling system is based on a level (percentage) of contamination rather than
a level of surviving individuals, and that because for lines of less than 600 units, 100 percent
inspection is required, it is therefore acceptable that the effective level of confidence gained by
the sampling method significantly increases as the consignment size moves below 10,000. This
is because a sample of around 590 provides 95 percent confidence that a contamination level of
1 in 200 (0.5 percent) will be detected in consignments larger than about 25,000 individuals.
4.9. Assumption around Transit Time of Commodity on the Air Pathway
An assumption is made around the time the fresh citrus and/or saplings take to get from the field
in India, Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan, Australia, or any other citrus exporting country to
Bangladesh ready for wholesale, if it is transported by Land port or Sea or Air shipment.
4.11. Assumption around Commodity Grown in Bangladesh
Section of
PRA
Uncertainties
Further work that would reduce
uncertainties
Taxonomy
None
-
Pathway
Presence of a pathway from
imported produce to suitable
protected environments, such as
botanical gardens.
• Monitor
all
suitable
protected
environments which are near points of
entry of infested produce.
• Check reports of finds by other citrus
exporting countries
Distribution
None
-
Hosts
None
-
Establishment
Establishment potential under
glasshouse in the PRA area.
Continue to monitor the literature for
reports of establishment in protected
environments.
Spread
Rate of potential spread in areas
at risk within the PRA area
Continue to monitor the literature for
reports on ability to spread.
Impact
Potential to cause damage in
protected environments
Continue to monitor the literature for
reports on damage caused in protected
environments
Management
None
-

Chapter 5: Review of Management Options

This chapter provides background information on possible measures to mitigate the biosecurity
risk associated with citrus available in Bangladesh as well as in importing citruses from India,
Thailand, China, Bhutan, Egypt, South Africa, Brazil, Australia, etc. The management options
for both non-quarantine and quarantine pests of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lemon) were reviewed and presented in this chapter separately as follows:
5.1. Management Options for Non-quarantine Pests of Citrus
The management options for non-quarantine pests (arthropod pests viz. insect and mite pests,
and diseases) of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) in Bangladesh as
identified through literature review are presented in this section as follows:
5.1.1. Management options for arthropod pests
The study team collected and reviewed different management options for arthropod (insect and
mite) pests of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) and finally
presented the reviewed findings in the following subheadings:
5.1.1.1. Lemon butterfly
(a) Cultural, botanical and bio-pesticide-based control: Lemon butterfly is one of the
economically important pests whose larval forms cause serious damage to the wild and cultivated
species of citrus during the later stages of development. The larvae may cause complete
defoliation of infested young plants (Butani and Jotwani, 1975). It is a major pest in nurseries,
young seedlings and new flush in mature citrus trees. It causes 83% defoliation in young citrus
plants (Narayanamma et al., 2001). The caterpillars feed voraciously and cause extensive
damage to nurseries and young seedlings leaving only midribs.
A research finding on the “Evaluation of new management approaches against lemon butterfly
(Papilio demoleus L.) infesting Jara lemon in Jaintapur, Sylhet, Bangladesh” conducted in the
year 2016 evident that among five management approaches viz., handpicking and killing of
lemon butterfly larvae, spraying of imidacloprid (Sapta 70 WG) @ 0.5 g/L of water, bio-neem
plus (Azadirachtin 1 EC) @ 1 ml/L of water, Spinosad (Tracer 45 SC) @ 1.25 ml/L of water,
Chlorfenapyr (Proclaim 5 SG) @ 1 g/L of water and an untreated control (water spray only), the
lowest leaf infestation (17.83%) was recorded in plants treated with Spinosad and Chlorfenapyr.
The highest leaf infestation (31.83%) was recorded in untreated control plants. But the
intermediate leaf infestation (20.85% to 21.33%) was recorded in plants treated with hand
picking and killing of lemon butterfly larvae, Imidacloprid and Bio-neem plus. Spinosad and
Chlorefenapyr treated plants produced the highest fruit yield (1.35 t ha-1) and also gave the
highest financial returns in terms of Marginal Benefit Cost Ratio (MBCR) (11.50: 1.0). But the
lowest MBCR (7.31: 1.0) was obtained from plants treated with hand picking and killing of
lemon butterfly larvae. The results clearly indicated that Spinosad (Bio-pesticide) is the most
cost-effective as well as environmentally safe management approach for lemon butterfly larvae
(Haque et al., 2019). They also reported that the biopesticides Spinosad (Tracer 45SC) and

chlorfenapyr (Intrepid 10 SG) proved to be the most effective in suppressing leaf infestation
caused by lemon butterfly larvae in Zara lemon. Among the whole treated trees, the lowest
percentage of leaf infestation (17.83%) was observed in the trees sprayed with spinosad (Tracer
45 SC) and chlorfenapyr (Intrepid 10 SG). In addition to leaf infestation reduction, spinosad and
chlorfenapyr treated trees also gave the highest fruit yield of Zara lemon (1.35 t ha -1).
Narayanamma and Savithri (2003) reported that utilizing various plant extracts such as neem
leaf extract, neem seed kernel, etc. was found an efficient method of lemon butterfly
management. Segarra-Carmona et al. (2010) found that the highest concentrations of spinosad
and Bacillus thuringiensis caused 100% mortality in the third instar larvae of lemon butterfly.
(b) Chemical control: Synthetic pesticides such as carbaryl, phosalone, acephate, pirimiphosmethyl, fenitrothion, permethrin, etc. can be used to control the assault of the lemon butterfly
(Batra, 1990; Solunke and Deshpande, 1991).
5.1.1.2. Citrus leaf miner
(a) Cultural control: Parietaria is cultivated in Italy as a substitute host for the parasitoids of
citrus leaf miner near citrus groves (Mineo et al., 1997). Collection and elimination of falling
leaves from the citrus grove is effective to reduce the infestation of citrus leaf miner. In addition,
fertilization and irrigation in citrus groves are useful in preventing citrus leaf miner (Zhang et
al., 1994). Iordanou and Charalambous (1998) evaluated some insecticides including spinosad
for the management of citrus leaf miner in the laboratory. They found that spinosad gave
satisfactory protection to the infestation of leaf miner for more than one-month period.
(b) Biological control: Bacillus thuringiensis is effective to control citrus leaf miner (Zhang et
al., 1994).
(c) Host-plant resistance: In India, citrus leaf miner-resistant cultivars included Carrizo,
Sacaton, Savage, Troyer, Yama Citrange, Citrumelo (Poncirus trifoliata x grapefruit), Cambell
Valencia, Pomary and Rubidoux, and Muraya koenigii (Batra et al., 1992).
(d) Chemical control: The insecticide Imidacloprid is effective against citrus leaf miner (Vargas
et al., 1999). imidacloprid can control leaf miner for approximately 100 days after application
(Nucifora et al., 1999). In Greece, Fenoxycarb is also efficient against leaf miner (Buchelos and
Foudoulakis, 2000). China has been the primary user of pyrethrins. Additionally, the
organophosphates phosmet, quinalphos, and dimethoate, as well as the carbamates carbaryl and
cartap, have been utilized (Zhang et al., 1994). Soap with fish oil resin and Pongamia oil were
the most effective remedies in India (Katole et al., 1993).
(e) Pheromone trap: (Z,Z,E)-7,11,13-hexadecatrienal (triene) and (Z,Z)-7,11-hexadecadienal
(diene) were used as a lure to capture male insect in USA (Leal et al., 2006).
(f) IPM programs: When necessary, release parasitoids and predators using Bacillus
thuringiensis applications that are precisely timed. If pheromone dispensers become widely
available to farmers, mating disruption should be an effective management tool, especially when
combined with biological control and little chemical control (Zhang et al., 1994).
5.1.1.3. Thrips

Franklinothrips megalops is a common predator of S. dorsalis where Erythrothrips asiaticus
[Aduncothrips asiaticus], is a highly seasonal species. The predaceous species, Scolothrips
indicus, feeds on the larvae of S. dorsalis. Geocoris ochropterus is also reported as a potential
predator of S. dorsalis. In Japan, parasitism of larval S. dorsalis at rates of up to 52% by the
trichogrammatid, Megaphragma sp. have been recorded on grapes. Banker plants, such as
ornamental capsicums, have been demonstrated to support populations of Amblyseius swirski, a
predatory phytoseiid mite, from which they can disperse to provide control of S. dorsalis
infesting greenhouse-grown crops. Commercially available entomopathogenic fungi (e.g.,
Beauveria bassiana, Metarhizium brunneum and Isaria fumosorosea) have been evaluated for
efficacy against S. dorsalis infesting pepper (Capsicum annuum) plants (Arthurs et al., 2013).
Planes et al. (2015) who found that spinosad and chlorfenapyr markedly reduced the nymphal
population of citrus thrips, Pezothrips kellyanus and showed a significant reduction in fruit
infestation.
5.1.1.4. Bark eating caterpillar
(a) Cultural control: Clean and overcrowding citrus orchard can suppress the population of
bark eating caterpillar (Butani, 1979).
(b) Mechanical control: When infestation levels are minimal, killing larvae by inserting an iron
spike into each hole is successful (Sharma and Kumar, 1986).
(c) Host plant resistant: According to Sandhu et al. (1977), 'Cattley' is the most resistant
cultivar of guava. Grapefruits are less susceptible to disease than oranges and mandarins (Sandhu
et al., 1979). The loquat cultivar 'Thames Pride' is the most resistant to I. quadrinatata (Lal and
Singh, 1982).
(d) Chemical control: Various insecticide applications can be used to manage the pest
efficiently. demeton methyl, dichlorvos and quinalphos were most effective against the
caterpillar (Singh and Dhamdhere, 1989).
5.1.1.5. Citrus mealybug
P. citri has developed resistance to certain pesticides, and P. citri control relies mainly on natural
enemies whose populations are diminished or exterminated by the same insecticides. In Tunisia,
a high level of resistance to chlorpyrifos has developed, presumably as a result of repeated use.
In an effort to prevent resistance, chlorpyrifos is often used solely during P. citri dormancy or
as a postharvest treatment in California (Ramzi et al., 2018). There are numerous natural
enemies. In Egypt, 12 species of parasitoid wasps were found on citrus mealybugs, according to
a survey. In addition, nine predatory insects, such as ladybird beetles, moths, a gall midge, and
a green lacewing, were identified (Ahmed and Abd-Rabou, 2010). A number of parasitoid wasps,
such as Leptomastidea abnormis, Leptomastix dactylopii, Chrysoplatycerus splendens, and
Anagyrus pseudococci, are employed as biological control agents. The brown lacewing
Sympherobius barberi, the green lacewing Chrysopa lateralis, hoverfly larvae, and the scalefeeding snout-moth larva are predators of this species (Gill, 2013).
5.1.1.6. Spiked mealybug
(a) Natural enemies: The parasitoid Pseudaphycus utilis is one of the most important natural
enemies of N. nipae. Within about a year of the introduction of P. utilis to Hawaii, N. nipae had

almost disappeared from Oahu and was soon almost eradicated from the Hawaiian Islands
(Bartlett, 1978).
(b) Chemical control: In Hawaii, the efficacy of a series of methods were evaluated as postharvest treatments to eliminate N. nipae, along with other mealybugs, scale insects and aphids,
from tropical cut flowers and foliage before shipment. A series of insecticidal dips were tested
and the most effective was found to be a combination dip for at least 5 minutes in an insecticidal
soap composed of potassium salts of fatty acids with fluvalinate (Hansen et al. 1992a). Vapour
heat treatment was found to kill mealybug adults and nymphs after 1 hour at 46.6°C; and nymphs
were killed after 2 hours at 45.2°C (Hansen et al., 1992b). Hydrogen cyanide fumigation
treatment was found to kill N. nipae nymphs on palms. Infestations of N. nipae were eliminated
in coconut plantations by chemically controlling Azteca ants which maintained and protected
the mealybug colonies.
5.1.1.7. Asian citrus psyllid
Among the natural enemies of the Asian citrus psyllid are hoverflies, lacewings, various species
of ladybug, and numerous species of parasitic wasp (Waterston, 1922). One of these wasps,
Tamarixia radiata, has been successfully distributed and established in a variety of citrusgrowing regions, including Florida (Hoy and Aguyen, 2001). Widespread pesticides are effective
against psyllid adults and nymphs. Spraying with phosphamidon 0.3ml or quinalphos 1ml or
thiometan 0.8 ml/l of water and bud burst stage gives knock down effect (Bindra et al., 1974).
The most effective method for controlling citrus greening disease is an integrated approach
comprising the use of healthy planting stock, the control of vectors, and the rapid removal of
affected trees and branches (Korsten, 2004).
5.1.1.8. Scale insect
Spraying with methidathion, chloropyrifos and pyriproxyfen has proven efficacy in reducing the
incidence of the pest. Another alternative is biological control using the parasite Aphytis melinus
de Bach. This method is now commonly used in citrus orchards in many countries (Otmani et
al., 2011).
5.1.1.9. Black citrus aphid
Spacing between the citrus plants and pruning old branches reduces the infestation of black citrus
aphid (Carver, 1978). Grafting on sour orange rootstock may be acceptable (Garnsey et al.,
1996). Several systemic insecticides including acephate imidacloprid and acetamiprid have been
used against T. citricida with various residual effects (Yamamoto et al., 2000).
5.1.1.10. Citrus blackfly
Chlorpyrifos, neonicotinoids, imidacloprid and pyrethroids cab be used against the nymph of
citrus blackfly. These insecticides also suppress the population of adult citrus black flies (Knapp,
5.1.1.11. Oriental fruit fly
(a) Regulatory control: Pre-harvest control measures which would mitigate the risk of B.
dorsalis are provided below. Post-harvest treatments against B. dorsalis include heat treatments,

cold treatments, ionizing radiation and fumigation (Dohino et al., 2017). A combination of preharvest measures is recommended for effective control of B. dorsalis.
(b) Cultural control: One of the most effective control techniques against fruit flies in general
is to wrap fruit, either in newspaper, a paper bag, or in the case of long/thin fruits, a polythene
sleeve (Shivendra and Singh, 1998). Early harvesting is also an effective control strategy for
mango (Gajendra et al., 1997). The removal and destruction of fallen fruits because they may
harbour larvae that could form a next generation. Destruction can either be by burning, deep
burrowing, feeding them to pigs, or putting the fruits in dark-coloured plastic bags and placing
them in the sun. Another method is raking or disturbing the soil below the fruit trees using other
means. This will expose the puparia, leading to desiccation or predation by other organisms.
(c) Biological control: Hymenopteran parasitoid, Fopius arisanus, was most effective to control
B. dorsalis (Gnanvossou et al., 2016). Soil application of entomopathogenic fungi in
combination with protein bait sprays reduced fruit infestation by B. dorsalis (Ekesi et al., 2011).
(d) Chemical control: A bait spray consists of a suitable insecticide (e.g., malathion, spinosad,
fipronil) mixed with a protein bait. Both males and females of fruit flies are attracted to protein
sources emanating ammonia, and so insecticides can be applied to just a few spots in an orchard
and the flies will be attracted to these spots. The protein most widely used is hydrolysed protein,
but some supplies of this are acid hydrolysed and so highly phytotoxic. Smith and Nannan (1988)
have developed a system using autolysed protein.
(e) IPM Programs: Using pheromone traps along with different cultural control methods is
practiced to control B. dorsalis. The trap used will usually be modelled on the Steiner trap (White
and Elson-Harris, 1994) or Jackson trap.
5.1.1.12. Termite
(a) Phytosanitary Measures: Logs being exported from countries where C. curvignathus occurs
should be debarked to reduce the risk of transporting alates that could found new colonies.
Fumigation of logs or wood material at the port of origin will also reduce the risk of transporting
nests, colony fragments or alates.
(b) Cultural Control and Sanitary Methods: Thinning should be conducted at suitable periods
to ensure trees are not grown in crowded, light-deprived situations. Mechanical injury to trees
from machines or weeding exercises should be minimized. Where pruning is conducted, the
wounds need to be properly dressed to reduce the likelihood of these becoming routes of entry
into the tree for the termite (Kirton et al., 1999b). The control of bark and stem borers is also
important because wounds from borers can predispose trees to attack by C. curvignathus as well
(Kirton et al. 1999b).
(c) Biological Control: The use of entomophagous nematodes and entomopathogenic fungi to
control species of Coptotermes has been largely experimental and laboratory-based, and most of
the work has focused on C. formosanus. The histopathology of infection by entomopathogenic
fungus Metarhizium anisopliae in C. curvignathus has been investigated in the laboratory, while
field-derived cultures of Conidiobolus coronatus have been demonstrated to be highly
pathogenic to C. curvignathus (Sajap et al., 1997).

(d) Chemical Control: Termiticides including chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin, alpha-cypermethrin
and new generation insecticides such as fipronil and imidacloprid are used for termites. The use
of organochlorine insecticides has been discontinued because of the persistent nature of these
insecticides in the environment and their harmful long-term effects on wildlife. Chlorpyrifos,
has been shown to give at least 4 years protection to Gmelina arborea grown in Sabah.
Prophylactic treatment can be used for highly susceptible tree species grown in medium- to highrisk sites but is not cost effective when the termite hazard is low. Remedial treatment is carried
out when trees are attacked by termites and is usually done by drenching the soil surrounding
the tree using a water-soluble insecticide formulation (Tho and Kirton, 1992).
(e) IPM Programs: The practice of prophylactic soil treatment with insecticides should
generally be avoided in favour of pest management practices that reduce the severity of the pest
problem. UNEP hosts a website that outlines many alternatives to pesticides for the management
of termites, including C. curvignathus.
5.1.1.13. Citrus Red Mite
(a) Cultural control: In gardens and on small fruit trees, regular, forceful spraying of plants
with water often will reduce mite numbers adequately. Be sure to get good coverage, especially
on the undersides of leaves. If more control is required, use an insecticidal soap or oil in your
spray, but test the product on one or two plants to be sure it isn’t damaging to them (Dreistadt et
al., 2004).
(b) Biological control: The predatory mites, including the western predatory mite, Galendromus
(formerly Metaseiulus) occidentalis, and Phytoseiulus mite species are mostly used against
mites. Predatory mites are about the same size as plant-feeding mites but have longer legs and
are more active. Other important predators—six spotted thrips (Scolothrips sexmaculatus), the
larvae and adults of the mite destroyer lady bird beetle (Stethorus picipes), the larvae of certain
flies including the cecidomyid Feltiella acarivora, and various general predators such as minute
pirate bugs, big-eyed bugs, and lace-wing larvae. Western flower thrips, Frankliniella
occidentalis, can be an important predator on mite eggs and larvae, but this species will also
inflict severe damage to plants if mites aren’t present on which to feed.
(c) Chemical control: Insecticidal soap or insecticidal oil need to be used. Both petroleumbased horticultural oils and plant-based oils such as neem, canola, or cottonseed oils are
acceptable. There are also several plant extracts formulated as acaricides (a pesticide that kills
mites) that exert an effect on spider mites. These include garlic extract, clove oil, mint oils,
rosemary oil, cinnamon oil and others. Sulfur sprays can be used on some vegetables, fruit trees,
and ornamentals (Dreistadt et al., 2004).
Khan et al. (2018) conducted a study in the farmer’s Jara lemon orchard at Bagerkhal village
under Fatehpur union, Jaintapur upazila, Sylhet during January to July 2016 to develop costeffective management approach against red mite (Panonychus citri) of Jara lemon. Treatments
applied in the study were spraying of soap powder @ 5g L-1 of water, abamectin (Vertimec 018
EC) @ 1.5ml L-1 of water, bioneem plus (Azadirachtin 1 EC) @ 1ml L-1 of water, propargite
(Omite 57 EC) @ 2ml L-1 of water and the control. The results revealed that lowest fruit
infestation (12.33%) was found from propargite (Omite 57 EC) treated plants followed by bioneem plus (Azadirachtin 1 EC) (18.66%) treated plants. The propargite treated plants produced

the highest fruit yield (1.79 t ha-1) which was closely followed by boineem plus (1.68 t ha-1)
treated plants. The results indicated that spraying of propargite and bioneem plus are costeffective miticides against red mite of Jara lemon.
5.1.2. Management Options for Diseases of Citrus
This section includes the management options reviewed for the diseases of citrus including
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) and finally presented here in the following subheadings:
5.1.2.1. Anthracnose
a) Cultural control: Anthracnose is reduced via orchard hygiene, modulation of blooming, and
integrated management of chemical, physical, and biological controls (Akem, 2006). Cooke et
al. (1998) observed that levels of endophytic organisms such as Botryosphaeria spp. were
dramatically reduced in mango orchards where a pruning program was introduced as a preharvest
management tool. Korsten (2006) discovered that preventing water stress during fruit
development and maturity and avoiding placing fruits on the ground inhibited the development
of illness.
(b) Biological control: Bacillus licheniformis, on its own or alternated with copper oxychloride
(allowed in organic farming management), has been evaluated as a preharvest spray treatment
to control mango fruit diseases (Prusky et al., 2009). Several microorganisms with in vitro or in
vivo activity against C. gloeosporioides have been isolated (Jeffries and Koomen, 1992), but few
examples have been used commercially in the field until Korsten (2004) isolated Bacillus
licheniformis from leaf and fruit surfaces, and effectively controlled anthracnose of mango. This
product was used either alone or in combination with hot water treatments for 5 minutes at 45°C
and with low doses of prochloraz or sodium hypochlorite, although only when used alone could
be considered in organic agriculture (Govender et al., 2005).
(c) Chemical control: The use of fungicides is hampered by the limited number of effective
products on the market and by regulations in producing and/or destination countries (Ploetz,
2018). Copper fungicides are typically the most common, however their efficiency is frequently
limited, and they are typically combined with other fungicides. In South Africa, it has been
demonstrated that monthly applications of copper oxychloride mixed with mancozeb are
effective against most post-harvest illnesses, however, the registration of di-thiocarbamate
fungicides such as mancozeb varies among production areas. To control anthracnose, mango
growers in Brazil most frequently choose for preventative treatments with fungicides containing
copper or triazoles. Another effective contact fungicide, chlorothalonil, is phytotoxic to fruit
larger than a golf ball and should not be used after early fruit set (Ploetz, 2018).
5.1.2.2. Die-back
Avoid mechanically damaging plants. Prevent termites and longicorn beetles from causing plant
harm. Reduce plant stress, including that resulting from drought and nutrient deficits. Reduce
sunburn on the trunk and branches when doing intensive tree pruning. Remove diseased branches
by severing them below the margin of the diseased or symptomatic parts. Disinfect the pruning
instrument between each plant. Remove from the orchard any symptomatic trimmed branches.
Do not prune mango trees when the canopy is moist or when it is raining. Adhere to the 'come
clean, go clean' principle, and be sure to clean and disinfect tree pruning equipment before

transporting it between farms. Although mango mulch is an important source of nutrients, it may
be advantageous to remove mango mulch/litter from under mango trees in orchards with a high
disease burden, as it is a potential source of inoculum.
5.1.2.3. Gummosis
Always maintain cleanliness in the orchard. Remove branches that are unproductive, dry, and
diseased/infested by insects. The unproductive branches are rapidly ascending. Use Bordeauxpaste 10 percent on pruning wounds and the main trunk from the ground up to approximately
one meter in height. After harvest, saturate the entire plant with a 1 percent Bordeaux mixture
and repeat during fruit setting. Check the orchard frequently. Immediately apply Bordeaux-pest
10 percent if the bark is cracking or has mechanical damage. Similarly, if there is gum discharge
on any area of the tree, remove it and apply Bordeaux-pest as described previously. Always use
protective clothes and follow the recommendations on the product label, including dosage,
timing of administration, and pre-harvest interval, while applying a pesticide (Thapa, 2014).
5.1.2.4. Scab
a) Cultural control: Remove or destroy infected plant material that can survive in soil material
to prevent infection. It is helpful to prune away old, infected stems to reduce the levels of
infection (Terry, 2014).
(b) Chemical control: Copper fungicide sprays (oxychloride, hydroxide, or oxide) must be
administered as soon as the blooms begin to appear and continued until the fruit has reached a
size of around 50 percent. Typically, the fruit is sprayed every week until it reaches the half-size
stage, and then every two-to-three week thereafter (Terry, 2014). Fungus infections are more
likely to originate and spread in wetter climates. Rain can diminish the efficacy of the fungicide
treatment, necessitating more frequent administrations under these conditions.
5.1.2.5. Sooty mold
As sooty mold is caused by the presence of honeydew, it is more effective to exclude and control
the honeydew-producing insects than the mold itself, which typically disappears once the insects
are eliminated. In instances when the mold itself must be controlled, mancozeb mixed with a
detergent has apparently been employed with some effectiveness in Mexico, while Sulphur,
Benomyl, Binapacryl, and Bordeaux mixture have produced successes against other kinds of
sooty mould. Mineral oils help control insects and clean trees by facilitating the production of
dry plaques, which can then be separated from fruit by precipitation and wind (Horst, 2008).
Indirectly, parasitoids have a negative impact on sooty mold by reducing the number of
honeydew-producing insects (Perez et al., 2009).
5.1.2.6. Pink disease
Frequent rounds of trimming and the burning of diseased waste can provide effective cultural
control. After diseased branches are removed from the tree, the pink encrustation and conidial
pustules of the fungus remain alive for a lengthy length of time. Copper formulations (e.g.,
Bordeaux mixture, copper oxychloride, copper carbonate); tridemorph paints in an ammoniated
latex base; triadimefon granules; chlorothalonil paints in a latex/bitumen base; and
fenpropimorph (in vitro) have been shown to be active against E. salmonicolor (Chee and Chiu,

5.1.2.7. Canker
(a) Cultural control: Utilizing nursery plants free of citrus canker is the first crucial step in
managing citrus canker. Establishing windbreaks around citrus plants reduces the illness.
Pruning of angular branches containing canker lesions eliminates overripe inoculum (Goto,
(b) Mechanical control: Photodynamic inactivation of citrus canker (Xanthomonas citri pv.
citri) has the potential to be applied in the control of citrus canker in field conditions (Ndemueda
et al., 2020).
(c) Botanical control: Rahman et al. (2020) carried out a study on “Efficacy of chemicals and
botanical extracts to control citrus canker on Kinnow in Sargodha region” applying nine
treatments, control (no chemical was applied), Neemsol @ 5 ml, copper oxychloride @ 3 g,
streptomycin sulphate @ 1 g, potassium acetyl benzoic acid @ 10 ml, difenoconazole @ 0.5 ml,
extracts of Acacia nilotica @ 10 ml, Datura alba @ 10 ml, and Allium cepa @ 10 ml. The results
showed that among botanicals, the disease control was 74%, 64%, 59%, and 52% due to
application of extract solutions of A. cepa, D. alba, Neem Oil, and A. nilotica, respectively. The
use of copper oxychloride, difenconazole, and extracts of A. cepa and D. alba are recommended
to citrus growers to control canker in Kinnow plantations during the critical period.
(d) Biological control: Different biocontrol agents such as antagonistic bacteria (Pseudomonas
spp. and Bacillus spp.) and bacteriophages have been reported against X. citri pv. citri.
Interactions between X. citri pv. citri and antagonistic bacteria including Bacillus subtilis,
Pantoea agglomerans, Pseudomonas syringae and Pseudomonas fluorescens have been reported
in vitro and in vivo (Poveda et al., 2021). Rhizobacteria can modulate citrus immunity resulting
in a systemic defence response against X. citri pv. citri. Islam et al. (2019) reported biocontrol
of citrus canker disease caused by X. citri pv. citri using Bacillus thuringiensis.
(e) Chemical control: Once citrus canker disease has reached epidemic proportions, it cannot
be managed with chemical treatments. Copper compounds are sprayed 10 to 14 days after the
first spring shoots develop to avoid primary infection on spring shoots. Copper sprayed prior to
wounding and/or inoculation reduced citrus canker incidence by greater than 90 percent. Copper
sprays administered from 24 h prior to 0.5 h after wounding and inoculation reduced woundassociated canker by 91.8% to 96.1%, whereas copper sprays applied up to 8 h after wounding
and inoculation reduced wound-associated canker by 67.8%. (Machado et al., 2021).
Rahman et al. (2020) carried out a study on “Efficacy of chemicals and botanical extracts to
control citrus canker on Kinnow in Sargodha region” applying nine treatments, control (no
chemical was applied), Neemsol @ 5 ml, copper oxychloride @ 3 g, streptomycin sulphate @ 1
g, potassium acetyl benzoic acid @ 10 ml, difenoconazole @ 0.5 ml, extracts of Acacia nilotica
@ 10 ml, Datura alba @ 10 ml, and Allium cepa @ 10 ml. The results showed that copper
oxychloride controlled the disease up to 74%, difenconazole up to 56%. The use of copper
oxychloride, difenconazole, and extracts of A. cepa and D. alba are recommended to citrus
growers to control canker in Kinnow plantations during the critical period.
Citrus canker is mainly controlled by the application of various chemicals such as fungicides
and bactericides at different times of the year. Various chemicals such as copper oxychloride
(Khan et al., 2018), streptomycin sulphate (Graham and Myers, 2011), streptomycin +

oxytetracycline (Graham et al., 2008), streptomycin in combination with copper oxide (Graham
et al., 2008), sodium arsenate and copper sulphate have been found effective in controlling citrus
canker in different citrus growing areas (Behlau et al., 2008). Understanding the ecological
conditions of citrus canker proliferation, are also very important aspect (Riasat et al., 2020).
Genome editing has been started for those genes which are sensitive to citrus canker (Jia et al.,
(f) IPM Programs: The relative contribution of three control measures, i.e., windbreak with
Casuarina cunninghamiana trees, copper sprays and leaf miner control were assessed by Behlau
et al. (2021). Individually, copper sprays showed the highest contribution to canker control,
followed by windbreak. Windbreak + copper sprays showed the highest efficiency for control of
the disease and reduced the incidence of diseased trees by 60%, and the incidence of diseased
leaves and fruit by ≥ 90% and increased the yield by 2.0 to 2.6-fold in comparison with the
unmanaged plots. Xanthomonas citri pv. citri does not survive for long periods in soil or in
association with non-host plants. Hence, an integrated programme for management of the
pathogen was implemented to prevent the occurrence of the disease in new plantings and to
eradicate the disease locally.
5.1.2.8. Powdery mildew
(a) Cultural control: Regular inspection of orchards and removal/pruning of infected leaves
and malformed panicles reduce the load of primary inoculum and improve fungicidal control
(Prakash and Raoof, 1994).
(b) Biological control: An isolate of Ampelomyces quisqualis parasitized powdery mildew and
reduced the disease in field trials. Nofal and Haggag (2006) reported that in vitro application of
biocontrol agents as Verticillium lecanii, Bacillus subtilis and Tilletiopsis minorto leaf disks
before inoculation with O. mangiferae markedly decreased conidial germination and leaf
infection.
(c) Chemical control: Numerous fungicides have been employed to combat this disease in
various jackfruit-growing nations. In addition to dormant sprays, multiple applications of
suitable fungicides at intervals of 15 to 20 days are necessary to effectively control the disease.
Initially, inorganic copper or sulfur-based compounds were utilized, followed by the introduction
of a variety of organic and systemic fungicides that served as eradicants, protectants, or both
(Nasir et al., 2014). The most effective fungicides against powdery mildew were copper-based
fungicides, sulphur-based fungicides, chlorothalonil, nitro compounds, and systemic fungicides
(benzimidazols, imidazols, morpholines, organophosphorus, oxathiins, piperazine, pyridimines,
strobilurins, and triazoles).
5.1.2.9. Tristeza virus
When grafting or topworking, use only certified, virus-free budwood. The Citrus Clonal
Protection Program (CCPP) provides virus-free and true-to-type bud lines to nurseries and
growers in California. Need to keep nurseries and greenhouses free from insect vectors. The
aphid is the main vector for this vector so the measurement practices against aphid control is
needed to follow to control this virus disease (Albiach-Marti, 2013).
5.1.2.10. Nematode

The endoparasitic microorganism Pasteuria penetrans and the egg-parasitic fungus
Purpureocillium lilacinum (Paecilomyces lilanicus) are the biological agent against nematodes.
Chemical control may be used on high-value crops, and a wide range of chemicals are available.
Seed treatments have become widely utilized to minimize the amount on active ingredient
applied or for the application of biological control agents. Often these tactics are reserved for the
most important row crops like soyabean, maize and cotton (Monfort et al., 2006).
5.2. Management Options for Quarantine Pests of Citrus for Bangladesh
The management options for quarantine pests of citrus including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lemon) as identified through literature review for Bangladesh are presented in this section as
follows:
5.2.1. Management Options for Quarantine Insect and Mite Pests
5.2.1.1. Citrus longhorn beetle
The main control measures against the spread of A. chinensis consist of the destruction and the
removal of infested trees including roots. Using root grinding equipment can help ensure
effectiveness. In addition, for effective control of A. chinensis in urban areas, the collaboration
of citizens is essential, for this reason it is very important to replace the destroyed infested plants
with non-host plants.
(a) Natural control: CLHB larvae are most susceptible to natural enemies in the early larval
instar stage, or approximately the first two months of development. In China, predation by the
weaver/red ants, Oecophylla smaragdina (Fab.) prevented the need for chemical control (Lieu
1945, Yang 1984).
(b) Sanitation: Field sanitation including cutting and burning/chipping of infested plant parts
can eliminate immature stages.
(c) Mechanical exclusion: Since eggs are laid under the bark at the base of the trunk, wire
nettings or spiral guards at the trunk base can serve as physical barrier for female oviposition.
(d) Biological control: The pathogenic fungi Beauveria brongniartii (Sacc.) is known to cause
high adult mortality. In Japan, studies demonstrated adult mortality of 46 to 100% when sheets
of polyurethane forms impregnated with Beauveria brongniartii were wrapped around the lower
portion of the trunk or hung from the crotch (CABI 2004).
(e) Chemical control: Systemic insecticides are injected into base of a tree from where it is
circulated to the branches, twigs, and foliage. The tree injection has been a successful component
of the Asian longhorned beetle eradication program and imidacloprid was recommended for use
during the eradication program for CLHB (WSDA 2002, Anonymous 2002b). Both adults and
larvae are exposed to insecticides when treated by tree injection.
5.2.1.2. Citrus weevil
Chemical controls using chlorinated hydrocarbons against D. abbreviatus were successful.
Neem oil, neem leaf extract, and other botanicals are helpful in controlling D. abbreviates by
preventing egg laying on leaves and lowering egg viability. A wide range of substances,
including ants, parasitic wasps, at least one virus, Bacillus thuringiensis, and a fungus adulticide,
are being researched as potential biological pest treatments for the weevil. To tackle the pest,

irrigation water in affected crops in Florida is released with the nematode Steinernema riobravis
(Jetter and Godfrey, 2009).
5.2.1.3. Mites
Successful natural enemies against P. oleivora include Amblyseius victoriensis, Hirsutella
thompsonii, Tydeus sp., Agistemus exsertus, etc. (CABI, 2021). To avoid conditions of water
stress and the ensuing flare-up, water wisely, especially during the summer. Spray 1000–1500
litres of water per hectare with monocrotophos 36 SL 1.5 L or dicofol 18.5 EC 1.0 L.
Narrow-range oil is applied annually to control citrus bud mite numbers (Hare et al., 1999).
Numerous predatory mites have been linked to the citrus bud mite, but because they are shielded
inside the buds, none seem to have an impact on the pest's populations or harm. Immersion in
hot water is helpful against E. lewisi.
5.2.2. Management Options for Quarantine Diseases
5.2.2.1. Citrus variegated chlorosis
It should be forbidden or strongly limited to import citrus fruits and plant materials from nations
where X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca is present. If imported planting material is used, it must be kept
in post-entry quarantine for two years and proven to be pest-free. Vector-free plants and fruits
should be imported, maybe with the help of a suitable treatment. According to Goheen et al.
(1973), a temperature treatment that kills the bacteria (45°C for at least 3 hours) may be useful
as a phytosanitary measure.
5.2.2.2. Citrus exocortis virus
It is important to take precautions to sterilise equipment before trimming or cutting another plant
since CEV can easily mechanically transmitted on infected knives and cutting tools. Cutting
tools should be sterilised using sodium hypochlorite or similar sterilant that has been shown to
successfully inactivate viroids. Only Poncirus trifoliata and hybrids made up of P. trifoliata,
limes, lemons, and citrons are symptomatic hosts, even though other Citrus species are
susceptible to CEV. To establish a trifoliate-type rootstock with tolerance for CEV, intergeneric
somatic hybrids between red tangerine (C. reticulata) and P. trifoliata have been created in
China (Guo et al., 2002).
5.2.2.3. Indian citrus ringspot virus
By subjecting infected Kinnow mandarin (Citrus nobilis x Citrus deliciosa) bud-sticks to dry
heat for 30 minutes or more at 50°C or for 120 minutes at 45°C, the virus was destroyed. For the
effective and efficient control of ICRSV, the creation, multiplication, and distribution of such
virus-free plants are advised (Singh et al., 2006).
5.3 References
Ahmed, N. and S. Abd-Rabou. (2010). Host plants, geographical distribution, natural enemies and
biological studies of the citrus mealybug, Planococcus citri (Risso) (Hemiptera:
Pseudococcidae). Egypt. Acad. J. Biolog. Sci. 3(1), 39-47.
Akem, C.N. (2006). Mango anthracnose disease: Present status and future research priorities. Plant
Pathology Journal. 5: 266–273.
Albiach-Marti, R.M. (2013). The Complex Genetics of Citrus tristeza virus. In: V. Romanowski (Ed.),
Current Issues in Molecular Virology-Viral Genetics and Biotechnological Applications.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56122

Anonymous. (2002b). Washington's tree slayer: The citrus longhorned beetle. Citrus longhorned beetle
eradication project. Washington State Department of Agriculture. (No longer available online).
Arthurs, S.P., Aristizábal, L.F. and Avery, P.B. (2013). Evaluation of entomopathogenic fungi against
chilli thrips, Scirtothrips dorsalis. Journal of Insect Science (Madison). 13(31): (18 April 2013).
Bartlett, B.R. (1978). Pseudococcidae. In: Introduced Parasites and Predators of Arthropod Pests and
Weeds: a World Review. Clausen, C.P. (ed.). Agriculture Handbook. 480: 137-170.
Batra, R.C. (1990). Citriculture in North-Western India. Proceedings of a Citrus Show-cum-Seminar on
Prospects and Problems of Kinnow Cultivation, Ludhiana, India, 6-7 January, 1989 [edited by
Gill, K.S.; Kanwar, J.S.; Raghbir Singh] Ludhiana, India; Punjab Agricultural University, 189-
Batra, R.C., Sharma, D.R. and Chanana, Y.R. (1992). Screening of citrus germplasm for their resistance
against citrus leaf miner, Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton. Journal of Insect Science, 5(2):150-152.
Behlau, F., Belasque, J., Bergamin, A., Graham, J.H., Leite, R.P. and Gottwald, T.R., 2008. Copper
sprays and windbreaks for control of citrus canker on young orange trees in southern Brazil. Crop
Protection, 27(3-5): 807-813.
Behlau, F., Belasque, J.J., Leite, R.P.J., Bergamin-Filho, A., Gottwald, T.R., Graham, J.H., Scandelai,
L.H.M., Primiano, I.V., Bassanezi, R.B. and Ayres, A.J. (2021). Relative contribution of
windbreak, copper sprays, and leaf miner control for citrus canker management and prevention
of crop loss in sweet orange trees. Plant Disease. 105(8): 2097-2105.
Bindra, O.S., Sohi, B.S. and Batra, R.C. (1974). "Note on the comparative efficacy of some contact and
systemic insecticides for the control of citrus psylla in Punjab". Indian Journal of Agricultural
Science. 43: 1087–1088.
Buchelos, C.T. and Foudoulakis, M. (2000). Evaluation of effectiveness of Insegar (fenoxycarb 250 g/kg)
WP against Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton (Lep., Gracillariidae) and its effect on Cales noacki
How. (Hym., Aphelinidae). Anzeiger fu^umlaut~r Scha^umlaut~dlingskunde, 73(1):19-21.
Butani, D. K. (1979). Insects of fruit crops. Periodical Expert Book Agency, Vivek Vihar, Delhi, 415p.
CABI. (2004). Crop Protection Compendium. http://www.cabicompendium.org/ (20 July 2018).
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
CABI. (2021). Papilio demoleus. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests, Wallingford,
UK.
Carver, M. (1978). The black citrus aphids, Toxoptera citricida (Kirkaldy) and T. aurantii (Boyer de
Fonscolombe) (Homoptera: Aphididae). Journal of the Australian Entomological Society,
17(3):263-270.
Chee, K.H. and Chiu, S.B. (1999). Notes on rubber pink disease control using sulphur slurry. Planter,
75(874):21-23.
Cooke, A.W., van der Kruyssen, A. and Johnson, G.I. (1998). The effect of comercial pruning on
colonization of mango by endophytic Dothiorella species. In: Post-harvest Handling of Tropical
Fruit. Champ, B.R., Highley, E. and Johnson, G.I (eds.). Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research (ACIAR), Canberra. pp: 128–130.
Dohino, T., Hallman, G.J., Grout, T.G., Clarke, A.R., Follett, P.A., Cugala, D.R., Tu, D.M., Murdita, W.,
Hernandez, E., Pereira, R. and Myers, S.W. (2017). Phytosanitary treatments against Bactrocera
dorsalis (Diptera: Tephritidae): current situation and future prospects. Journal of Economic
Entomology, 110(1) 67-79.
Dreistadt, S.H., Clark, J.K. and Flint, M.L. (2004). Pests of Landscape Trees and Shrubs: An Integrated
Pest Management Guide, 2nd ed. Oakland: Univ. Calif. Agric. Nat. Res. Publ. 3359.
Ekesi, S., Maniania, N.K. and Mohamed, S.A. (2011. Efficacy of soil application of Metarhizium
anisopliae and the use of GF-120 spinosad bait spray for suppression of Bactrocera invadens
(Diptera: Tephritidae) in mango orchards. Biocontrol Science and Technology, 21(3) 299-316.
Gajendra, S., Singh, G., Lavi, U., Degani, C., Gazit, S., Lahav, E., Pesis, E., Prusky, D., Tomer, E. and
Wysoki, M. (1997). Integrated management of Bactrocera (Dacus) dorsalis (Hendel) in mangos.
In: Acta Horticulturae [Proceedings of the 5th international mango symposium, Tel Aviv, Israel,
1-6 September 1996, Volume 2.], 455821-828.
Garnsey, S.M., Gottwald, T.R. and Yokomi, R.K. (1996). Control strategies for citrus tristeza virus. In:
Hadidi A, Khetarpal RK, Koganezawa H, eds. Plant Viral Disease Control: Principles and
Practices. St. Paul, USA: APS Press, (in press).

Gill, H. K. (2013). Citrus Mealybug, Planococcus citri (Risso) (Insecta: Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae).
EENY-537. Entomology and Nematology, Florida Cooperative Extension Service. University of
Florida IFAS. Published 2012, revised 2013.
Gnanvossou, D., Hanna, R., Bokonon-Ganta, A.H., Ekesi, S. and Mohamed, S.A. (2016). Release,
establishment and spread of the natural enemy Fopius arisanus (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) for
control of the invasive Oriental fruit fly Bactrocera dorsalis (Diptera: Tephritidae) in Benin,
West Africa. In: Fruit fly research and development in Africa - towards a sustainable management
strategy to improve horticulture, [ed. by Ekesi S, Mohamed SA, de Meyer M]. Springer
International Publishing. 575-600.
Goheen, A.C., Nyland, G. and Lowe, S.K. (1973). Association of a rickettsia like organism with Pierce's
disease of grapevines and alfalfa dwarf and heat therapy of the disease in grapevines.
Phytopathology, 63(3):341-345.
Goto, M. (1992). Citrus canker. In: Plant Diseases of International Importance, Vol. III, Diseases of Fruit
Crops, [ed. by Kumar, J., Chaube, H.S., Singh, U.S., Mukhopadhyay, A.N.]. Englewood Cliffs,
USA: Prentice Hall. 170-208.
Govender, V., Korsten, L. and Sivakumar, D. (2005). Semi-commercial evaluation of Bacillus
licheniformis to control mango postharvest diseases in South Africa. Postharvest Biology and
Technology. 48: 254–258.
Graham, J.H. and Myers, M.E., 2011. Soil application of SAR inducers imidacloprid, thiamethoxam, and
acibenzolar-S-methyl for citrus canker control in young grapefruit trees. Plant Disease, 95(6):
725-728.
Graham, J.H., Leite, J.R.P., Yonce, H.D. and Myers, M., 2008. Streptomycin controls citrus canker on
sweet orange in Brazil and reduces risk of copper burn on grapefruit in Florida. In Proceedings
of the Florida State Horticultural Society. Florida State Horticultural Society, US., 121: 118-123.
Guo, W.W., Cheng, Y.J. and Deng, X.X. (2002). Regeneration and molecular characterization of
intergeneric somatic hybrids between Citrus reticulata and Poncirus trifoliata. Plant Cell
Reports. 20(9):829-834.
Hansen, J.D., Hara, A.H. and Tenbrink, V.L. (1992 b). Vapor heat: a potential treatment to disinfest
tropical cut flowers and foliage. HortScience. 27(2): 139-143.
Hansen, J.D., Hara, A.H. and Tenbrink, V.L. (1992a). Insecticidal dips for disinfesting commercial
tropical cut flowers and foliage. Trop. Pest Manag. 38(3): 245-249.
Haque, R., M. A. Maleque, S. M. L. Rahman, A. U. Khan and M. A. H. Liton Bhuiyan. 2019. Evaluation
of new management approaches against lemon butterfly (Papilio demoleus L.) infesting Zara
lemon in Jaintapur, Sylhet, Bangladesh Bangladesh J. Entomol. 29(2): 1-12.
Hare, J.D., Rakha, M. and Phillips, P.A. (1990). Citrus Bud Mite (Acari: Eriophyidae): an Economic Pest
of California Lemons? Journal of Economic Entomology, Volume 92, Issue 3, 1 June 1999, Pages
663–675.
Horst, R.K. (2008). Westcott's Plant Disease Handbook, Ed.7 [ed. by Horst, R. K.]. Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer-Verlag GmbH, xiii + 1317 pp.
Hoy, M.A. and Nguyen, R. (2001). Classical biological control of Asian citrus psylla. Citrus Industry 81:
48-50.
Iordanou, N. and Charalambous, P. 1998. Chemical control of the citrus leaf miner, Phyllocnistis citrella
(Stainton) (Lepidoptera, Phyllocnistidae), in Cyprus. Technical Bulletin of Cyprus Agricultural
Research Institute, TechBull. No. 197, pp. 1-16.
Islam, M.N., Ali, M.S., Choi, S.J., Hyun, J. W. and Baek, K.H. (2019). Biocontrol of citrus canker disease
caused by Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri using an endophytic Bacillus thuringiensis. Plant
Pathology Journal. 35(5): 486-497.
Jeffries, P. and Koomen, I. (1992). Strategies and prospects for biological control of diseases caused by
Colletotrichum. In: Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control. Bailey, J.A. and Jeger, M.J.
(eds.). Published by CAB International, WalIingford, UK. Pp. 337–357.
Jetter, K. M. and K. Godfrey. (2009). Diaprepes root weevil, a new California pest, will raise costs for
pest control and trigger quarantines. California Agriculture 63:3 121-6.
Jia, H., Zhang, Y., Orbović, V., Xu, J., White, F.F., Jones, J.B. and Wang. N., 2017. Genome editing of
the disease susceptibility gene Cs LOB 1 in citrus confers resistance to citrus canker. Plant
Biotechnology Journal, 15(7): 817-823.

Katole, S.R., Thakare, H.S. and Mahajan, R.K. (1993). Effects of some plant products and insecticides
on the infestation of citrus leaf miner on Nagpur mandarin. Journal of Maharashtra Agricultural
Universities, 18(1):67-68.
Khan, W.A., Atiq, M., Sahi, S.T., Khan, A.A., Ali, S., Younas, M., Ali, Y., Bashir M.R. and Sajid, M.,
2018. Induction of resistance against citrus canker through chemicals and plant activators.
Advances in Zoology and Botany, 6(1): 26-30.
Kirton, L.G., Brown, V.K. and Azmi, M. (1999 b). The pest status of the termite Coptotermes
curvignathus in Acacia mangium plantations: incidence, mode of attack and inherent
predisposing factors. J. Trop. Forest Sci. 11(4): 822-831.
Knapp, J.S.L. (1994). Control of insects, mites and diseases of Florida’s Dooryard Citrus trees [Internet].
Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University
of Florida, (Circular, 139). 1994.
Korsten, L. (2004). "Citrus Huanglongbing: Review, Present status and Future Strategies". Diseases of
Fruits and Vegetables Volume I: 229–245.
Korsten, L. (2006). Advances in control of postharvest diseases in tropical fresh produce. International
Journal of Postharvest Technology and Innovation. 1: 48–61.
Lal, H. and Singh, Y.P. (1982). Incidence of bark-eating caterpillar on different loquat (Eriobotrya
japonica Lindl.) cultivars. Science and Culture, 48(3):98-100.
Leal, W.S., Parra-Pedrazzoli, A.L., Cossé, A.A., Murata, Y., Bento, J.M.S. and Vilela, E.F. (2006).
Identification, synthesis, and field evaluation of the sex pheromone from the citrus leafminer,
Phyllocnistis citrella. Journal of Chemical Ecology, 32(1):155-168.
Lieu KOV. 1945. The study of wood borers in China -- I: Biology and control of the citrus-rootcerambycids, Melanauster chinensis, Forster (Coleoptera). Florida Entomologist 27: 61-101.
Machado, F.J., Marin, T.G.S., Canôas, F., Silva Junior, G.J. and Behlau, F. (2021). Timing of copper
sprays to protect mechanical wounds against infection by Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri, causal
agent of citrus canker. European Journal of Plant Pathology. 160(3): 683-692.
Mineo, G., Sinacori, A., Rizzo, M.C. and Massa, B. (1997). On the arthropod fauna of Parietaria spp.
(Urticaceae). 3rd contribution. Parasitoids of Cosmopterix pulchrimella Chambers (Lepidoptera
Cosmopterigidae). Bollettino di Zoologia Agraria e di Bachicoltura, 29(2): 195-198.
Monfort, W.S., Kirkpatrick, T.L., Long, D.L. and Rideout, S. (2006). Efficacy of a novel nematicidal
seed treatment against Meloidogyne incognita on cotton. Journal of Nematology. 38(2): 245-249.
Narayanamma, V.L. and Savithri, P. (2003). Evaluation of biopesticides against citrus butterfly, Papilio
demoleus L. on sweet orange. Indian Journal of Plant Protection, 31(2):105-106.
Nasir, M., Muhammad Mughal, S., Mukhtar, T. and Zaman Awan, M. (2014). Powdery mildew of
mango: A review of ecology, biology, epidemiology and management. Crop Protection. 64: 19–
Ndemueda, A., Pereira, I., Faustino, M.A.F. and Cunha, Â. (2020). Photodynamic inactivation of the
phytopathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri. Letters in Applied Microbiology.
71(4): 420-427.
Nguyen, R., Sailer, R.I. and Hamon, A.B. (1993). Catalogue of Aleyrodidae on citrus and their natural
enemies (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae). Occasional Papers of the Florida State Collection of
Arthropods, 8:11.
Nofal, M.A. and Haggag, W.A. (2006). Integrated management of powdery mildew of mango in Egypt.
Crop Protection. 25: 480-486.
Nucifora, A. and Nucifora, M.T. (1999). The citrus bud miner in Sicily: current strategies of control and
future perspectives. Proceedings 5th World Congress of the International Society of Citrus
Nurserymen, Montpellier, France, 5-8 March, 1997., 251-260.
Otmani, M.E., Oubahou, A.A. and Zacarias, L. (2011). Citrus spp.: orange, mandarin, tangerine,
clementine, grapefruit, pomelo, lemon and lime. Woodhead Publishing Series in Food Science,
Technology and Nutrition. Pages 437-514, 515e-516e.
Parry-Jones, E. (1936). Bionomics and ecology of red scale in Southern Rhodesia. Publication Mazoe
Citrus Experimental Station 5: 11–52.
Perez, J.L., French, J.V., Summy, K.R., Baines, A.D. and Little, C.R. (2009). Fungal phyllosphere
communities are altered by indirect interactions among trophic levels. Microbial Ecology,
57(4):766-774.

Planes, L., Catalán, J., Jaques, J. A., Urbaneja, A. and Tena, A. 2015. Pezothrips kellyanus (Thysanoptera:
Thripidae) Nymphs on orange fruit: Importance of the second generation for its management.
The Florida Entomologist. 98(3): 848-855.
Ploetz, R.C. (2018). Integrated disease management in mango cultivation. In: Achieving Sustainable
Cultivation of Mangoes. Galán-Saúco, V. and Lu. P. (eds.). Burleigh Dodds Series in Agriculture
Science, Number 34. Published by Burleigh Dodds Science Publising Limited, Cambrigde, UK.
Pp. 459-496.
Poveda, J., Roeschlin, R.A., Marano, M.R. and Favaro, M.A. (2021). Microorganisms as biocontrol
agents against bacterial citrus diseases. Biological Control. 158104602.
Prakash, O. and Raoof, M.A. (1994). Studies on powdery mildew (Oidium mangiferae) disease of mango:
distribution, perpetuation, losses and chemical control. Biological Memoirs. 20: 31-45.
Prusky, D., Kobiler, I., Miyara, I. and Alkan, N. (2009). Fruit diseases. In: The Mango: Botany,
Production and Uses (2nd Edition). Litz, R. (ed.). Published by CAB International, Oxfordshire,
UK. pp: 210-230.
Ramzi, M., Belzunces, L.P., Suma, P., Zappalà, L., Gaetana, M., Kaouthar, G.L., Agatino, R. and
Antonio, B. (2018). Vine and citrus mealybug pest control based on synthetic chemicals. A
review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development. Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique
(Springer). 38 (4): 1–20.
Rehman, M.A., Ali, S., Afzal, M.B.S., Khan, M.N. and Ali, M., 2020. Efficacy of chemicals and botanical
extracts to control citrus canker on Kinnow in Sargodha region. Journal of Innovative Sciences,
6(2): 101-107.
Riasat, A., Ghazanfar, M.U. and Raza, W., 2020. Interaction of citrus canker with Phyllocnistis citrella
Stainton. Pakistan Journal of Phytopathology, 32(1): 01-07.
Sajap, A.S., Atim, A.B., Husim, H. and Wahab, Y.A. (1997). Isolation of Conidiobolus coronatus
(Zygomycetes: Entomophthorales) from soil and its effect on Coptotermes curvignathus
(Isoptera: Rhinotermitidae). Sociobiology. 30(3): 257-262.
Sandhu, G.S., Khangura, J.S. and Deol, I.S. (1977). Varietal susceptibility of guava cultivars to bark
eating caterpillar. Punjab Horticulture Journal, 17:1-2.
Segarra-Carmona, A. E., Cabrera-Asencio, I., Flores-López, L.E. and Morales-Collado, L. 2010. Life
cycle and control of the Asian lime swallowtail, Papilio demoleus (Lepidoptera: Papilionidae):
A new invasive pest in Puerto Rico. J. Agric. Univ. Puerto Rico, 94(1/2): 165-174.
Sharma, D.D. and Kumar, H. (1986). How to control bark-eating caterpillars. Indian Horticulture,
31(1):25.
Shivendra, S. and Singh, R.P. (1998). Neem (Azadirachta indica) seed kernel extracts and azadirachtin
as oviposition deterrents against the melon fly (Bactrocera cucurbitae) and the oriental fruit fly
(Bactrocera dorsalis). Phytoparasitica, 26(3) 191-197.
Singh, B., Sharma, S., Rani, G., Zaidi, A.A., Hallan, V., Virk, G.S. and Nagpal, A. (2006). In vitro
production of Indian citrus ringspot virus-free plants of Kinnow mandarin (Citrus nobilis Lour ×
C. deliciosa Tenora) by nucellar embryo culture. Plant Pathology Journal (Faisalabad), 5(3):274-
Singh, U.C. and Dhamdhere, S.V. (1989). Field screening of some guava varieties against the bark eating
caterpillar, Indarbela quadrinotata (Walker). Indian Journal of Entomology, 51(2): 216-217.
Smith, D. and Nannan, L. (1988). Yeast autolysate bait sprays for control of Queensland fruit fly on
passionfruit in Queensland. Queensland Journal of Agricultural and Animal Sciences, 45(2):169-
Solunke, B.R. and Deshpande, S.V. (1991). Studies on use of plant products for the control of lemon
butterfly larvae. Journal of Maharashtra Agricultural Universities, 16(2):302-303.
Terry, M. (2014). Disease management in mango. International Pest Control. 56(2): 104–107.
Thapa, K.S. (2014). Citrus gummosis: Phytophthora spp. PlantwisePlus Knowledge Bank.
https://doi.org/10.1079/pwkb.20147801443
Tho, Y.P. and Kirton, L.G. (1992). The economic significance of Coptotermes termites in Malaysian
forestry. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Plant Protection in the Tropics
(edited by Ooi, P. A. C.; Lim, G. S.; Teng, P. S.) Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Malaysian Plant
Protection Society, No. 4:193-199.

Vargas, O.H., Bobadilla, D., JimTnez, R.M. and Vargas, C.H. (1999). A preliminary trial about larval
susceptibility of Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton (Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae) to insecticides
sprayed on the foliage. IDESIA, 16:23-27.
Waterston, J. (1922). On the chalcidoid parasites of psyllids (Hemiptera, Homoptera). Bulletin of
Entomological Research 13: 41-58.
White, I.M. and Elson-Harris, M. M. (1994). Fruit flies of Economic Significance: Their Identification
and Bionomics. Wallingford, UK: CAB International.
WSDA. (2002). Citrus longhorned beetle eradication project: Tree injection: Another weapon against the
Citrus longhorned beetle.
Yamamoto, P.T., Roberto, S.R. and Pria, W.D. (2000). Systemic insecticides applied on citrus tree trunk
to control Oncometopia facialis, Phyllocnistis citrella and Toxoptera citricida. Scientia Agricola,
57(3):415-420.
Yang P. 1984. The application of Oecophylla smaragdina Fabr. in South Fujian. Fujian Agricultural
Science and Technology, No. 5:23-25 (CAB abstracts).
Zhang, A.G., O'Leary, C. and Quarles, W. (1994). Chinese IPM for citrus leafminer [Phyllocnistis
citrella] (update). IPM Practitioner, 16(8):10-13.

Chapter 6: Identification of Pests

6.1. Introduction
The pest risk assessment was done with the aim to determine Bangladesh’s phytosanitary
measures for the pests of citrus, which are being imported in Bangladesh from any one of the
citrus exporting countries viz. India, China, Thailand, Bhutan, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil and
Australia, etc. The insect and mite pests, diseases, weeds and other pests such as snails and slugs,
etc. associated with Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) have been identified through
primary field survey at growers’ level as well as through literature review of secondary
documents, reports, journals, proceedings, web-based publications such as CABI, EPPO
bulletin, and others. Such identified pests then presented in this chapter as follows:
6.2. Pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo lebu varieties) recorded in Bangladesh
The primary data collected survey at field level for conducting “Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) in Bangladesh” was done in four (4) major Zara/Colombo
Lebu growing districts viz. Narshingdi, Sylhet, Moulovibazar and Tangail of Bangladesh. From
the field survey and literature review, the precise findings of the study in line with the presence
of insect and mite pests, diseases, weed pests and other pests associated with Zara/Colombo
Lemon along with their identity (scientific name, family and order), plant parts affected, pest
status, infestation severity and district-wise farmers response (maximum and minimum) on the
incidence of respective pest have been presented in the following sub-headings:
6.2.1. Insect and mite pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) in Bangladesh
A total number of 26 arthropod pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) were recorded in
Bangladesh as reported by the Zara/Colombo Lemon growers and relevant experts collected
through field survey as well as collected through literature review. Among these 26 arthropod
pests, 25 were insect pests and one was mite pest. The incidence and damage potential of reported
insect and mite pests of Zara/ColomboLemonhave been presented below:
6.2.1.1. Insect pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu recorded: There were two ways considered to
record the insect and mites of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) available in Bangladesh.
The ways were field level survey and literature review. The insect and mite pests of
Zara/Colombo Lemon identified through those ways are illustrated below:
(a) Field survey-based findings: The study team made a list of insect and mite pests of
Zara/Colombo Lemon identified through interviews of Zara/Colombo Lemon farmers in the preselected PRA areas as well as gathered information from the field level officials of Department
of Agriculture Extension (DAE) and other experts. As per field survey-based data, it was
revealed that the incidence of sixteen (16) arthropod pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lemonwere identified, of which fifteen (15) were insect pests and one was mite pest. Among
fifteen (15) insect pests those recorded for Bangladesh were lemon butterfly (Papilio demoleus,
Papilio polytes), citrus leaf miner (Phyllocnistis citrella), citrus leaf roller (Psorosticha zizyphi),
citrus stem borer (Chelidonium cinctum), citrus mealybug (Planococcus citri), Asian citrus
psyllid bug (Diaphorina citri), citrus blackfly (Aleurocanthus woglumi), citrus greenhouse

whitefly (Trialeurodes vaporariorum), black citrus aphid (Toxoptera citricida), green citrus
aphid (Aphis spiraecola), citrus soft scale (Coccos hesperidum), citrus green stink bug (Nezara
viridula), citrus thrips (Scirtothrips dorsalis), citrus fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), and termite
(Odontotermes obesus) (Table-6.1).
(b) Literature review-based findings: Besides, field level survey-based findings, the study
team also made a list of insect and mite pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) through
reviewing the secondary documents collected from different sources. As per literature review, it
was revealed that a total of ten (10) insect pests of Citrus medica were recorded for Bangladesh
and these were fruit sucking moth (Othreis spp.), orange spined bug (Biprorulus bibax), citrus
bug (Rhynchocoris humeralis), citrus whitefly (Dialeurodes citri), striped mealybug (Ferrisia
virgata), citrus red scale (Aonidiella aurantia), citrus yellow scale (Aonidiella citrina), flower
thrips (Frankliniella schultzei), bark and stem borer (Indarbela quadrinotata) and Oriental fruit
fly (Bactrocera dorsalis) (Table-6.2).
6.2.1.2. Mite pest recorded: As per field survey-based primary data, it was also revealed that
the citrus red spider mite (Panonychus citri) of Zara/ColomboLemonwas recorded for
Bangladesh. This mite was designated as minor pest with low infestation intensity (Table-6.1).
6.2.1.3. Mollusk pests recorded: As per field survey findings, it was also revealed that the two
mollusk pests were reported by the Zara/Colombo Lemon growers and these were grey garden
slug (Deroceras reticulatum) and brown garden snail (Cornu aspersum). Both of these pests
were designated as minor pest with low infestation intensity (Table-6.4).
6.2.1.4. Damage potentiality of insect and mite pests
Among the identified insect pests, lemon butterfly, leaf miner and citrus aphids were reported
more damaging than other insect pests and these insects were designated as major insect pests
of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon) and caused damage with high infestation intensity. In
case of lemon butterfly, larvae cause severe damage through feeding on leaf lamina leaving only
the mid-rib. The larvae also cause damage the young twig when they become more voracious.
Other insect pests presented in the list were designated as minor pests and cause damage to
Zara/ColomboLemonwith low infestation intensity, whereas the citrus thrips was also designated
as major pest but cause damage with medium infestation on fruits, where the damage symptoms
are shown as whitish color due to scrapped out the green content from the fruit surface and
subsequently turned straw color on full grown matured fruit that reduces the market value of the
fruits (Table-6.1).
6.2.1.5. Location-wise incidence and diversity of insect pests
Considering the location-wise variation of farmers’ response on the incidence of insect pests of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemon), most (75 to 95%) of the farmers of Sylhet, and Tangail
districts reported that incidence of lemon butterfly, leaf miner and citrus aphid was occurred on
Zara/ColomboLemon. These pests were designated as major pests and caused severe damage
with high infestation intensity (Table 6.1). The farmers’ response on the incidence of other insect
pests on Zara/Colombo Lemon were also shown in the Table 6.3.

Table-6.1. Insect and mite pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo lebu varieties), their identity, status and infestation severity as recorded
in Bangladesh through field survey
SN
Common
Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Incidence occurred or not
Zara Lemon
Colombo
Lemon
Other
citrus
A. Insect pests
Lemon
butterfly
Papilio demoleus, P. polytes
Family: Papilionidae
Order: Lepidoptera
Young leaf, twig
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus leaf
miner
Phyllocnistis citrella
Family: Gracillariidae
Order: Lepidoptera
Fruit, Leaf
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus leaf
roller
Psorosticha zizyphi
Family: Depressariidae
Order: Lepidoptera
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus stem
borer
Chelidonium cinctum
Family: Cerambycidae
Order: Coleoptera
Stem
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus
mealybug
Pseudococcus filamentosus
Planococcus citri Risso
Family: Pseudococcidae
Order: Homoptera
Fruit, leaf, stem,
flower
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Asian citrus
psyllid bug
Diaphorina citri
Family: Liviidae
Order: Hemiptera
Stem, leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus woglumi
Family: Aleyrodidae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, fruit
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Greenhouse
whitefly
Trialeurodes vaporariorum
Family: Aleyrodidae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, fruit
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes

Black citrus
aphid
Toxoptera citricida
Family: Aphididae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, shoot,
flower, fruit
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Green citrus
aphid
Aphis spiraecola
Family: Aphididae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, shoot,
flower, fruit
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus soft
scale
Coccus hesperidum
Family: Coccidae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, stem, twig,
fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus green
stink bug
Nezara viridula
Family: Pentatomidae
Order: Hemiptera
Fruit, young
shoot
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Family: Thripidae
Order: Thysanoptera
Leaf, flower,
young fruit
Major
Medium
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus fire ant
Solenopsis invicta
Family: Formicidae
Order: Hymenoptera
Flower, young
developing fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Termite
Odontotermes obesus
Family: Termitidae
Order: Isoptera
Stem, root
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
B. Mite pest
Citrus red
spider mite
Panonychus citri
Family: Tetranychidae
Order: Acarina
Leaf, fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table-6.2. Insect pests of citrus present in Bangladesh, their status, plant parts affected and infestation severity identified through
literature review
SN Common Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Present in citrus
Reference
Zara
Lemon
Colombo
Lemon
Others
citrus
Fruit sucking moth
Othreis spp.
Family: Noctuidae
Order: Lepidoptera
Fruit
Major
High
No
No
Yes
EPPO
Orange spined bug
Biprorulus bibax
Family: Pentatomidae
Order: Coleoptera
Fruit
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Citrus bug
Rhynchocoris humeralis
Family: Pentatomidae
Order: Hemiptera
Fruit
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Citrus whitefly
Dialeurodes citri
Family: Aleyrodidae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
EPPO
Striped mealybug
Ferrisia virgata
Family: Pseudococcidae
Order: Homoptera
Stem, leaf,
fruit
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Citrus red scale
Aonidiella aurantia
Family: Diaspididae
Order: Homoptera
Stem, leaf,
fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Citrus yellow scale
Aonidiella citrina
Family: Diaspididae
Order: Homoptera
Leaf, stem,
fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Alam
Flower thrips
Frankliniella schultzei
Family: Thripidae
Order: Thysanoptera
Flower
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2019)

SN Common Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Present in citrus
Reference
Zara
Lemon
Colombo
Lemon
Others
citrus
Bark and stem
borer
Indarbela quadrinotata
Family: Metarbelidae
Order: Lepidoptera
Bark, trunk
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)
Oriental fruit fly
Bactrocera dorsalis
Family: Tephritidae
Order: Diptera
Fruit
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et
al. (2014)

Table-6.3. District-wise farmers’ response (%) on the incidence of insect and mite pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties)
and other citruses in Bangladesh as identified through field survey
SN
Common Name
Farmers’ response* (%) on the incidence of insect and mite pests of citrus by district
Incidence on Zara Lemon
Incidence on ColomboLemon
Maximum
(%)
Minimum
(%)
Maximum
(%)
Minimum
(%)
A. Insect pests
Lemon butterfly
Moulvibazar (75.6%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (94.2%)
Moulvibazar (6.3%)
Citrus leaf miner
Sylhet (95.0%)
Tangail (0%)
Tangail (95.0%)
Moulvibazar (8.1%)
Citrus leaf roller
Moulvibazar (10.0%)
Tangail (0%)
Sylhet (7.5%)
Narsingdi (1.7%)
Citrus stem borer
Sylhet (14.2%)
Moulvibazar, Tangail (0%)
Tangail (15.0%)
Narsingdi (2.5%)
Citrus mealybug
Sylhet (25.8%)
Moulvibazar, Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (15.0%)
Moulvibazar (1.9%)
Asian citrus psyllid bug
Moulvibazar (10.6%)
Tangail (0.83%)
Narsingdi (12.5%)
Sylhet, Moulvibazar,
Tangail (0%)
Citrus blackfly
None
None
Sylhet (9.2%)
Narsingdi (2.5%)
Greenhouse whitefly
Sylhet (10.1%)
Tangail (0.83%)
Narsingdi (9.2%)
Sylhet (2.5%)
Black citrus aphid
Sylhet, Moulvibazar
(66.8%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (100%)
Sylhet (5.8%)
Green citrus aphid
Sylhet, Moulvibazar
(66.8%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (100%)
Sylhet (5.8%)

Citrus soft scale
Sylhet (5.0%)
Moulvibazar, Tangail
(0%)
Narsingdi (4.2%)
Tangail, Moulvibazar,
Sylhet (0%)
Citrus green stink bug
Moulvibazar (3.1%)
Sylhet, Tangail
(0%)
Narsingdi
(5.0%)
Tangail
(2.5%)
Citrus thrips
Sylhet
(49.2%)
Tangail
(0.83%)
Narsingdi
(38.3%)
Tangail
(6.7%)
Citrus fire ant
Moulvibazar
(8.8%)
Tangail
(0%)
Tangail
(8.3%)
Narsingdi
(2.5%)
Termite
Sylhet
(5.8%)
Moulvibazar, Tangail
(0%)
Sylhet
(9.2%)
Narsingdi, Tangail,
Moulvibazar (0%)
B. Mite pest
Citrus red spider mite
Moulvibazar (4.4%)
Tangail
(0.83%)
Narsingdi
(5.8%)
Tangail
(2.5%)
*N.B.: The numerical values in the parenthesis of a column indicate the percent response of zara/colombo lebu growers, whether the respective pest incidence occurred or
not on zara/colombo lebu plant/plant parts during data collection through face-to-face interview at field level

Table-6.4. Mollusk pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties), their status, plant parts affected and infestation severity as
recorded in Bangladesh through field survey
SN
Common
Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Present in citrus
Zara
Lemon
Colombo
Lemon
Other
citrus
Grey garden
slug
Deroceras reticulatum,
Family: Limacidae
Order: Stylommatophora, Phylum: Mollusca
Citrus young
foliage and fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Brown
garden snail
Cornu aspersum, Family: Helicidae, Order:
Stylommatophora, Phylum: Mollusca
Leaves and bark
of young plant,
ripening fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes

6.2.1.6. Comparison of recorded arthropod and mollusk pests identified through present
PRA study (2023) with the previous PRA report (2014)
There was a study on “Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of Citrus in Bangladesh” conducted in the year
of 2014 sponsored by the “Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh (SPCB) Project
under the Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE), Ministry of Agriculture, Bangladesh”. The
study team of present PRA study compared the findings of previous ‘PRA of Citrus in Bangladesh’
with the current ‘PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) in Bangladesh’ conducted
in 2023. It was noted that the previous PRA study was conducted for different citruses, but the
present PRA study was conducted only for Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties (Citrus medica).
However, in case of pest listing, the present PRA study identified a total of 16 arthropod pests of
Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) through field survey, of which 15 were insect pests
and one mite pest those were shown in the Table-6.1. Besides field survey, the present PRA study
also identified additional 10 insect pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) through
literature review as shown in the Table-6.2. Whereas the previous PRA study identified a total of
21 arthropod pests for different citruses including Zara/Colombo Lebu, among which 16 insect
and one mite pests were identified only for Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties.
Conversely, a number (4) of insect pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties those were reported in
the previous PRA study, which were not identified through the field survey of present PRA study
but reported in the present PRA study identified through literature review. These insect pests were
citrus whitefly (Dialeurodes citri), citrus red scale (Aonidiella aurantia), citrus yellow scale
(Aonidiella citrina), bark and stem borer (Indarbela quadrinotata). Whereas in the present PRA
study, a number of additional insect pests (5) were also recorded for Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties
as identified through field survey, but not reported in the previous PRA study. The newly listed
insect pests were greenhouse whitefly (Trialeurodes vaporariorum), green citrus aphid (Aphis
spiraecola), citrus soft scale (Coccus hesperidum), citrus green stink bug (Nezara viridula), citrus
fire/red ant (Solenopsis invicta) as shown in the Table-6.1.
In addition of insect and mite pests, two mollusk pests in the field of Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties
were also identified through field survey of the current PRA study, but not identified through the
previous PRA study. The newly reported mollusk pests were grey garden slug (Deroceras
reticulatum) and brown garden snail (Cornu aspersum). Both of these pests are designated as
minor pest with low infestation intensity (Table-6.4).
6.2.1.7. Pictorial presentation of insect and mite pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu: During field
visit and observation, the PRA study team captured photographs of available insect and mite pests
associated with Zara/Colombo Lebu and affected plants/plant parts. Simultaneously, study team
collected relevant photographs from secondary sources. These pictures have been presented as
evidence of infestation as follows:

Following photographs showing the infestation of insect and mite pests of Zara/Colombo Lebu
at farmers’ field in the PRA study areas

(a) Lemon butterfly visiting Zara Lebu
flowers at field level
(a) Lemon butterfly laid egg singly on young
leaves of citrus

(c) Caterpillars of lemon butterfly feeding on
leaf lamina of citrus
(d) Infested leaves of Zara Lebu damaged by
lemon butterfly larva

(e) Infested leaves on a twig of Zara Lebu
caused by lemon butterfly larvae
(f) Infested leaves on the twigs of Colombo
Lebu caused by lemon butterfly larvae
Plate-6.1: Infestation of lemon butterfly (Papilio demoleus, Lepidoptera: Papilionidae)
and its damages

(a) Citrus leaf miner adult
(b) Leaf miner larva causing mining on leaf

(c) Leaf miner infested citrus leaf showing
conspicous mining on leaf lamina
(d) Severely infested leaf of Zara Lebu
showing straw color symptoms caused by
citrus leaf miner

(e) Severely damage citrus leaves casused by
leaf miner
(f) Severely damage citrus twig by curling
leaves due to leaf miner infestation

(g) Leaf miner infested leaves on a twig of
Colombo Lebu
(h) Severely damage citrus leaves casused by
leaf miner
Plate-6.2: Citrus leaf miner (Phyllocnistis citrella, Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae) and its
damages

(a) Catepillar of citrus leafroller making roll
on the citrus leaf
(b) Citrus leafroller folded the citrus leaves

Plate-6.3: Citrus leafroller (Psorosticha zizyphi, Lepidoptera: Depressariidae) infestation
and its damages

(a) Zara Lebu stem showing infestation
caused by citrus stem borer
(b) Stem borer infested Zara Lebu stem
showing dried apex of a twig after infestation

(c) Stem borer infested Zara Lebu stem
showing larva inside the stem after broken
(d) Stem borer infested Zara Lebu stem
showing larva inside the stem after broken
Plate-6.4: Citrus stem borer (Chelidonium cinctum, Coleoptera: Cerambycidae)
infestation on Zara Lebu and its damages

(a) Adult mealybug infestation on citrus stem
(b) Mealybug infestation on citrus leaf

(c) Mealybug infestation on citrus fruit
(d) Mealybug infestation on citrus leaf and
leaf petiol
Plate-6.5: Citrus mealybug (Planococcus citri, Homoptera: Pseudococcidae) infestation
on stem, leaves and fruit of citrus and its damage

(a) Citrus psyllid bug infestation on newly
growing citrus leaves and twigs
(b) Severe infestation of citrus psyllid bug on
the ventral side of leaf

(c) Citrus psyllid bug transmitted citrus
greening disease
(d) Severely damaged plant due to psyllid bug
transmitted citrus greening disease infection
Plate-6.6: Citrus psyllid bug (Diaphorina citri, Hemiptera: Liviidae) infestation on citrus
and its damages

(a) Citrus blackfly adult
(b) Citrus blackfly laid eggs on citrus leaf in a
circular manner

(c) Citrus blackfly (nymphs) infestation on the
ventral surface of Zara Lebu variety
(d) Severe infestation of citrus blackfly on
citrus leaves making black markings
Plate-6.7: Citrus blackfly (Aleurocanthus woglumi, Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) infestation
on citrus and its damages

(a) Citrus leaf showing adult whitefly
infestation on the ventral surface of leaf
(b) Citrus leaf showing infestation of
spiralling adult whitefly on the ventral surface
Plate-6.8: Citrus whitefly (Trialeurodes vaporariorum, Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) and its
damages

(a) Green citrus aphid infestation on the
ventral surface of young leaf
(a) Black citrus aphid infestation on the
ventral surface of older leaf
Plate-6.9: Black citrus aphid (Toxoptera citricida, Homoptera: Aphididae) infestation on
Zara Lebu and its damaging symptoms

(c) Severely infested leaves on a twig by
black citrus aphid
(c) Severe infestation of green citrus aphid on
the ventral surface of young leaves of Zara
Lebu
Plate-6.10: Green citrus aphid (Aphis spiraecola, Homoptera: Aphididae) infestation on
Zara Lebu and its damaging symptoms

(a) Citrus soft scale (brown) insect infestation
on citrus stem
(b) Citrus soft scale (brown) insect infestation
on citrus leaf
Plate-6.11: Citrus brown soft scale (Coccus hesperidum, Homoptera: Coccidae)
infestation and its damages

(a) Adult green stink bug sucking juices from
citrus fruit
(b) Stink bug laid eggs in a special
arrangement on citrus leaf

(c) Citrus green stink bug infestation on
young leaves
(d) Stink bug infestation causing damage by
sucking juices from young stem

(e) Zara Lebu showing stink bug infestation
causing damage by sucking juices from fruit
(f) Zara Lebu showing infestation caused by
stink bug nymphs that suck juices from fruit
Plate-6.12: Citrus green stink bug (Nezara viridula, Hemiptera: Pentatomidae) infestation
on Zara Lebu and its damaging symptoms

(a) Thrips infested Zara Lebu showing
whitish surface on the fruit at very early stage
due to scraped out of green content
(b) Thrips infested Zara Lebu showing
whitish symptom spreaded over the surface of
fruit due to scraped out of green content

(c) Thrips infested Colombo Lebu showing
whitish symptom spreaded over the surface of
the fruit due to scraped out of green content
(d) Severely infested Zara Lebu by Thrips
showing straw color symptom spreaded out
over the fruit surface at later stage of
scrapped out green content from the fruit
surface

(f) Severely damaged Zara Lebu by Thrips infestation showing straw color symptom at later
stage of scrapped out green content from the surface of fruit
Plate-6.13: Citrus thrips (Scirtothrips dorsalis, Thysanoptera: Thripidae) infestation on
Zara Lebu and its damaging symptoms

(a) Incidence of citrus fire ant on Zara Lebu
plant at field level
(b) Citrus fire ant infestation on leaves and
twig of Zara Lebu at field level
Plate-6.14: Citrus fire ant (Solenopsis invicta, Hymenoptera: Formicidae) infestation on
stem and leaves of Zara Lebu plant and its damage

(a) Citrus red scale infestation on leaf
(a) Citrus red scale infestation on fruit
Plate-6.15: Citrus red scale (Aonidiella aurantia, Homoptera: Diaspididae) infestation
and its damages on citrus
(a) Red spider mite (tiny sized) infestation on
citrus leaf by sucking cell sap and forming
webs
(b) Adult red spider mite on on citrus leaf
surface

(c) Red spider mite infested citrus leaves
showing yellow color and drop-off from twig
(d) Red spider mite infested lemon showing
tiny red mites on fruit surface
Plate-6.16: Citrus red spider mite (Panonychus citri, Acarina: Tetranychidae, Class:
Arachnida) infestation and its damages on citrus

(a) Slug infestation on Zara Lebu leaf
(a) Snail infestation on Zara Lebu leaf
Plate-6.17: Grey garden slug (Deroceras
reticulatum, Family: Limacidae, Order:
Stylommatophora, Phylum: Mollusca)
infestation and its damage
Plate-6.18: Brown arden snail (Cornu
aspersum, Family: Helicidae, Order:
Stylommatophora, Phylum: Mollusca)
infestation and its damage
6.2.2. Diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo lebu varieties) in Bangladesh
Two ways were considered to record the diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties)
available in Bangladesh. The ways were field survey and literature review. A total number of 33
diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) were recorded in Bangladesh as reported
by the Zara/Colombo lebu growers and relevant experts collected through field survey as well as
collected through literature review. Among these 32 diseases, 12 diseases identified through field
survey and the rest 20 diseases were identified through literature review. The incidence and
damage potential of reported diseases of Zara/Colombo lebu varieties have been presented below:
6.2.2.1. Field survey-based findings: The study team made a list of diseases of Zara/Colombo
Lebu through interviews of Zara/Colombo Lebu farmers in the pre-selected PRA areas as well as
gathered information from the field level officials of Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE)

and other experts. As per field survey-based data, it was revealed that the incidence of thirteen (13)
diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) were identified, of which eleven (11)
were fungal diseases and another two (2) diseases were caused by bacteria. The fungal diseases of
were anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides), die-back (Fusarium solani and Phomopsis
citri), gummosis (Phytopthora citrophthora), scab (Elsinoe fawcettii), sooty mould (Capnodium
citri), pink disease (Botryobasidium salmonicolor), powdery mildew (Oidium citri), citrus wilt
(Fusarium spp.), black spot (Phyllosticta citricarpa) and melanose (Diaporthe citri). The bacterial
diseases of Zara/Colombo lebu varieties identified through field survey were canker (Xanthomonas
axonopoides pv. citri) and citrus greening (Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus).
6.2.2.2. Literature review-based findings: The study team made a list of diseases of Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) through review of secondary documents collected from
different secondary sources. As per literature review findings, it was revealed that a total of twenty
(20) diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) were identified, of which eight (8)
were fungal diseases, two (2) were viral diseases and rest 10 diseases were caused by nematodes
as shown in the Table-6.6. The fungal diseases of were blue/green mold (Penicillium sp.), damping
off (Pythium sp. and Rhizoctonia solani), black mold (Aspergillus niger), foam disease (unknown),
fruit rot (Fusarium sp.), bark rot (Melanomma citricola) and stem-end-rot (Lasiodiplodia
pseudotheobromae). The recorded viral diseases were Tristeza (Citrus tristeza virus) and Psorosis
(Citrus psorosis virus). Ten (10) diseases of Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties identified through
literature review were root lesion (Criconemoides sp.), stem injury (Ditylenchus dipsaci), root
decay (Helicotylenchus sp.), root lesion (Hoplolaimus indicus), root lesion (Radopholus similis),
root lesion (Pratylenchus spp.), root injury (Hoplotylus spp.), root decay (Tylenchus
semipenetrans), root decay (Xiphinema spp.) and discoloration (Tylenchorhynchus sp.).
6.2.2.3. Isolation, purification and morphological characterization of Causal organism of
Canker (Xanthomonas citri pv citri) in vitro
Xanthomonas citri pv. citri were isolated from infected leaf and infected fruit of citrus those were
collected from different locations Sylhet and Moulobibazar. The isolates were purified by streak
plate method on nutrient agar media where pale yellow to yellow pigmented bacterial colonies
were formed on the medium after 72 hours of incubation at 28 ± 2oC which were identical to
Xanthomonas citri pv citri (Fig. 1). The colonies were creamy white in color. The isolates were
rod shaped, yellow or pale yellow in color. Elevation, margin and surface of all isolates were
convex, even and mucoid, respectively. The unique opaque yellow colour colonies were obtained
in the medium.

Figure-6.1. Xanthomonas citri pv citri on nutrient agar media
Biochemical Characteristics of Xanthomonas citri pv citri
Biochemical characteristics of isolates were studied in order to check similarity of biochemical
features with genus Xanthomonas by subjecting to various biochemical tests. In gram staining
results indicated, Gram-negative bacteria have a thinner layer (10% of cell envelope), and are
stained pink with safranin. Here, the isolated bacteria found to gram negative, motile and rod
shaped under light microscope at 100X magnification. After adding the kovac’s reagent, bacteria
did not produce red/pink color band on the top of the tube and H2S was not produced as no black
precipitation was formed. In Kovac’s test, medium containing filter paper and oxidizing agent
reagent did not produce any color. The isolated bacteria were considered as gram negative enteric
bacteria. Similar outcome was obtained by Kajal et al., (2021), Ali et al., (2017) and Soares et al.,
(2010), with Xanthomonas citri pv citri in medium. Bacteria isolated from Citrus aurantifolia by
Abu baker et al., (2016) also showed similar results by different biochemical test. Our results
confirmed the work of Mubeen et al., (2015), Islam et al., (2014) and Hussain et al., (2010) who
used several biochemical tests to identify and characterize different strains of citrus canker causing
bacteria.
6.2.2.4. Damage potentiality of diseases
Among the identified diseases, four fungal diseases such as anthracnose, die-back, gummosis, scab
and one bacterial disease such as citrus greening were reported more damaging than other diseases
and these diseases were designated as major diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu
varieties) those caused damage with high infection intensity. Whereas another bacterial disease
such as canker also reported more damaging than other diseases, which was designated as major
disease of Zara Lebu variety, but never caused disease on Colombo variety, i.e., the Colombo Lebu
variety is resistant against citrus canker (Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri). Other diseases of
Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties as shown in the Table-6.5 and Table-6.6 were designated as minor
status those caused damage with low infection intensity.
6.2.2.5. Location-wise incidence and diversity of diseases
Considering the location-wise variation of farmers’ response on the incidence of diseases of Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties), almost all (95%) farmers of Sylhet district reported that

incidence of gummosis disease was occurred on Zara Lebu variety, which was lowest in Tangail
district (0%). Whereas 95% farmers of Tangail district reported that the incidence of gummosis
disease was occurred on Colombo Lebu variety, which was lowest in Sylhet district (9.2%). The
maximum and minimum level of incidences of other major diseases such as anthracnose, die-back,
scab, canker and greening diseases on Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties were found 0 to 80%, 0 to
72%, 0.83 to 86%, 0 to 66% and 0 to 69%, respectively as reported by the Zara/Colombo Lebu
growers in various sample districts. The district-wise farmers’ responses (maximum and
minimum) on the incidence of other diseases as recorded in Bangladesh are also shown in the
Table 6.7.

Table-6.5. Diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) and other citrus, their occurrence in Bangladesh, identify,
plant parts affected, pest status and infection severity identified through field survey
SN
Common Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infection
severity
Incidence occurred or not
Zara
lebu
Colombo
lebu
Others
citrus
A. Causal organism: Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides
Family: Glomerellaceae
Order: Glomerellales
Branch, leaf
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Die-back
Fusarium solani
Family: Nectriaceae
Order: Hypocreales
Branch
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Family: Valsaceae
Order: Diaporthales
Branch
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Gummosis
Phytophthora citrophthora
Family: Peronosporaceae
Order: Peronosporales
Stem
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Scab
Elsinoe fawcettii
Family: Elsinoaceae
Order: Myriangiales
Leaf, Fruit
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sooty mold
Capnodium citri
Family: Capnodiaceae
Order: Capnodiales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Pink disease
Botryobasidium salmonicolor
Family: Corticiaceae
Order: Corticiales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Powdery mildew
Oidium citri
Family: Erysiphaceae
Order: Erysiphales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Citrus wilt
Fusarium spp.
Family: Nectriaceae
Order: Hypocreales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Black spot
Phyllosticta citricarpa
Family: Botryosphaeriaceae
Order: Botryosphaeriales
Leaf
Major
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Melanose
Diaporthe citri
Stem, fruit
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes

SN
Common Name
Pest Identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infection
severity
Incidence occurred or not
Zara
lebu
Colombo
lebu
Others
citrus
Family: Diaporthaceae
Order: Diaporthales
B. Causal organism: Bacteria
Canker
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri
Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Order: Xanthomonadales
Leaf, stem,
Fruit
Major
High
No
Yes
Yes
Citrus greening
Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus,
Family: Rhizobiaceae,
Order: Hyphomicrobiales
Leaf, Fruit
Major
High
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table-6.6. Disease pests of citrus present in Bangladesh, their status, plant parts affected and infestation severity
SN
Common
Name
Pest identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Incidence occurred or not
References
Zara
lebu
Colombo
lebu
Others
citrus
A. Causal organism: Fungi
Blue/green
mold
Penicillium sp.
Family:Trichocomaceae
Order: Eurotiales
Fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Damping off
Pythium sp.
Family: Pythiaceae
Order: Peronosporales
Stem/Root
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Damping off
Rhizoctonia solani
Family: Ceratobasidiaceae
Order: Cantharellales
Stem/Root
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Black mold
Aspergillus niger
Family: richocomaceae
Order: Eurotiales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Foam disease
Unknown
Leaf/stem
Minor
Low
No
No
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Fruit rot
Fusarium sp.
Family: Nectriaceae
Order: Hypocreales
Fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.

SN
Common
Name
Pest identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Incidence occurred or not
References
Zara
lebu
Colombo
lebu
Others
citrus
Bark rot
Melanomma citricola
Family: Melanommataceae
Order: Pleosporales
Fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
F38.
Stem-end rot
Lasiodiplodia
pseudotheobromae
Family: Botryosphaeriaceae
Order: Botryosphaeriales
Fruit
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
B. Causal agent: Virus

Tristeza
Citrus tristeza virus
Family: Closteroviridae
Order: Martellivirales
Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Akhter et al.
Psorosis
Citrus psorosis virus
Family: Aspiviridae
Order: Serpentovirales
Leaf, stem
Minor
Low
No
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
C. Causal organism: Nematode

Root lesion
Criconemoides sp.
Family: Criconematidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Stem injury
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Family: Anguinidae
Order: Tylenchida
Stem, Leaf
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Root decay
Helicotylenchus sp.
Family: Hoplolaimidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Root lesion
Hoplolaimus indicus
Family: Hoplolaimidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
CABI/EPPO
Root lesion
Radopholus similis
Family: Pratylenchidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Root lesion
Pratylenchus spp.
Family: Pratylenchidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Root injury
Hoplotylus spp.
Family: Pratylenchidae
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.

SN
Common
Name
Pest identity
Plant parts
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Incidence occurred or not
References
Zara
lebu
Colombo
lebu
Others
citrus
Order: Tylenchida
Root decay
Tylenchus semipenetrans
Family: Tylenchulidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Root decay
Xiphinema spp.
Family: Longidoridae
Order: Dorylaimida
Root
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynchus sp.
Family: Belonolaimidae
Order: Tylenchida
Root, Stem,
Bark
Minor
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ahmed et al.

Table-6.7. District-wise farmers’ response (%) on the incidence of diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) as
recorded in Bangladesh through field survey
SN
Common Name
District-wise farmers’ response* (%) on the incidence of diseases by district
Incidence on Zara lebu
Incidence on Colombo lebu
Maximum (%)
Minimum (%)
Maximum (%)
Minimum (%)
1. Anthracnose
Sylhet (80.2%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (74.4%)
Sylhet (9.2%)
2. Die-back
Sylhet (71.7%)
Tangail (0%)
Tangail (68.2%)
Sylhet (9.2%)
3. Gummosis
Sylhet (95.0%)
Tangail (0%)
Tangail (95.0%)
Sylhet (9.2%)
4. Scab
Sylhet (85.7%)
Tangail (0.83%)
Narsingdi (91.8%)
Sylhet (9.2%)
5. Sooty mould
Moulvibazar (30.7%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (22.5%)
Tangail (6.7%)
6. Pink disease
Sylhet (10.1%)
Tangail (0%)
Tangail (6.1%)
Narsingdi (2.5%)
7. Powdery mildew
Sylhet (20.4%)
Tangail (0%)
Sylhet (9.2%)
Narsingdi (2.5%)
8. Citrus wilt
Sylhet (60.6%)
Tangail (0%)
Tangail (58.3%)
Sylhet (5.8%)
9. Black spot
Moulvibazar (20.6%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (22.9%)
Tangail (3.7%)
10. Melanose
Moulvibazar (10.3%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (12.6%)
Tangail (1.7%)
11. Canker
Sylhet (65.7%)
Tangail (0%)
None
None
12. Citrus greening
Sylhet (69.3%)
Tangail (0%)
Narsingdi (64.6%)
Sylhet (5.0%)

*N.B.: The numerical values in the parenthesis of a column indicate the percent response of zara/colombo lebu growers, whether the
respective pest incidence occurred or not on zara/colombo lebu plant/plant parts during data collection through face-to-face
interview at field level

6.2.2.6. Comparison of identified diseases through present PRA study (2023) with the
previous PRA report (2014)
The expert team of present PRA study compared the findings of previous ‘PRA of Citrus in
Bangladesh’ conducted in the year of 2014 with the current ‘PRA of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo
Lebu varieties) in Bangladesh’ conducted in 2023. In case of disease listing, the present PRA study
identified a total of 13 diseases of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) through field
survey, of which 11 were fungal diseases and two diseases were caused by bacteria as shown in
the Table-6.5. Besides field survey, the present PRA study also identified additional 20 diseases
of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) through literature review as shown in the Table-
6.6. Whereas the previous PRA study identified a total of 16 diseases for Zara/Colombo Lebu, of
which eleven (11) fungal, two (2) viral and three (3) nemic diseases.
Conversely, four (4) diseases namely blue/green mold (Penicillium sp.), damping off Pythium sp.,
Rhizoctonia solani), Tristeza (Citrus tristeza virus) and Psorosis (Citrus psorosis virus) of
Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties were reported in the previous PRA study, which were not identified
through the field survey of present PRA study, but reported in the disease list of present PRA study
identified through literature review (Table-6.6). Whereas in the present PRA study, ten (10)
additional diseases (10) were also reported for Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties as identified through
field survey, of which five (5) diseases caused by fungi and five (5) diseases caused by nematodes.
But these ten (10) diseases were not reported in the previously (2014) conducted PRA study report.
The newly enlisted five (5) fungal diseases were black mold (Aspergillus niger), foam disease
(unknown), fruit rot (Fusarium sp.), bark rot (Melanomma citricola) and stem-end-rot
(Lasiodiplodia pseudotheobromae). The newly enlisted five (5) nemic diseases were root lesion
caused by two species of nematodes such as Criconemoides sp. and Hoplolaimus indicus; stem
injury caused by Ditylenchus dipsaci; root decay caused by two (2) species of nematode such as
Helicotylenchus sp. and Xiphinema spp.; root injury caused by Hoplotylus spp. and discoloration
disease caused by Tylenchorhynchus sp. as shown in the Table-6.6.
6.2.2.7. Pictorial presentation of diseases of Zara/Colombo Lebu: During field observation, the
PRA study team captured photographs of diseases associated with the Zara/Colombo Lebu and
affected plants as well as plant parts. Simultaneously, study team also collected relevant
photographs from secondary sources. These pictures have been presented as follows:

(a) Anthracnose disease of zara lemon on leaf
(b) Anthracnose disease of Colombo Lebu on
leaf

(c) Severe anthracnose symptom on citrus
leaf
(d) Anthracnose disease symptom on fruit
Plate-6.19. Anthracnose of zara and Colombo lemon (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides,
Family: Glomerellaceae, Order: Glomerellales) and its damages

(a) Die back disease of zara lemon
(b) Die back disease of Colombo lemon
Plat-6.20. Die back (Phomopsis citri,
Family: Valsaceae, Order: Diaporthales)
and its damages
Plate-6.21. Die back (Fusarium solani,
Family: Nectriaceae, Order: Hypocreales)
and its damages

(a) Citrus gummosis on stem
(b) Citrus gummosis on stem
Plate-6.22. Gummosis (Phytophthora citrophthora, Family: Peronosporaceae, Order:
Peronosporales) and its damages

(a) Citrus scab on leaf
(b) Citrus scab on stem

(c) Citrus scab on fruit
(b) Citrus scab on fruit
Plate-6.23. Citrus scab (Elsinoe fawcettii, Family: Elsinoaceae, Order: Myriangiales) and
its damages

(a) Sooty mould on leaf
(b) Citrus leaf severely infected by sooty mould
fungus on leaf
Plate-6.24. Sooty mould (Capnodium citri,Family: Capnodiaceae, Order: Capnodiales)
and its damages

(a) Pink disease on leaf
(a) Pink disease on stem
Plate-6.25. Pink disease (Botryobasidium salmonicolor, Family: Corticiaceae, Order:
Corticiales) and its damages

(a) Powdery mildew disease on leaf
(b) Powdery mildew disease on leaf and stem
Plate-6.26. Powdery mildew ( Oidium citri, Family: Erysiphaceae, Order: Erysiphales)
and its damages

(a) Citrus wilt symptom
(b) Dead plant after severe wilting
Plate-6.27. Wilt of citrus (Fusarium spp., Family: Nectriaceae; Order: Hypocreales) and
its damages

(a) Citrus blackspot on leaf
(b) Citrus blackspot on leaf

(c) Citrus blackspot on fruit
(d) Citrus blackspot on fruit (enlarged view)
Plate-6.28. Citrus black spot (Phyllosticta citricarpa, Family: Botryosphaeriaceae; Order:
Botryosphaeriales) and its damages

(a) Citrus melanose on fruit
(b) Severely infected citrus fruit by citrus
melanose
Plate-6.29. Citrus melanose (Phyllosticta citricarpa, Family: Botryosphaeriaceae; Order:
Botryosphaeriales) and its damages

(a) Citrus canker on leaf (Jaintapur, Sylhet)
(b) Citrus canker on leaf and twig

(c) Citrus stem canker
(d) Severely infected citrus fruit by citrus
canker

(e) Citrus canker on fruit
(f) Citrus canker on fruit (enlarged view)

(g) Citrus canker on fruit of zara lemon
(h) Citrus canker on fruit (Goyanghat, Sylhet)
Plate-6.29. Citrus canker (Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Order: Xanthomonadales) and its damages

(a) Citrus greening disease on leaf
(b) Severe citrus greening symptom on leaf
Plate-6.30. Citrus greening (Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Family: Rhizobiaceae,
Order: Hyphomicrobiales) and its damage

6.2.3. Weeds of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo lebu varieties) in Bangladesh
6.2.3.1. Incidence of weeds in the field of Zara/Colombo Lebu: A total number of three (3)
weeds (Table-6.8) were reported as the problem in the field of Zara/Colombo lebu in Bangladesh
those were identified through field survey. The enlisted weeds were asthma weed (Euphorbia
hirta), sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) and dove weed (Murdannia nudiflora).
Table-6.8. Weeds of Zara/Colombo lebu, their identity, status and infestation severity
Common
name
Scientific
name
Family
Order
Plant stage
affected
Pest
status
Infestation
severity
Asthma
weed
Euphorbia
hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Seedling
Major
Medium
Sensitive
plant
Mimosa
pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Seedling
Major
Medium
Dove
weed
Murdannia
nudiflora
Commelinaceae Commelinales Seedling
Minor
Low
6.2.3.2. Damage potentiality of weeds: Among three (3) weeds identified as the problem, all these
weeds affect the field during seedling stage of the Zara/Colombo Lemon, out of which asthma
weed and sensitive plant were designated as major weeds and caused damage with medium
infestation intensity, whereas the dove weed was designated as minor weed and caused damage
with low infestation intensity (Table-6.8). It is noted that all these weeds cause damages the
Zara/ColomboLemonfield during seedling stages through up-taking soil nutrients as competitor.
6.2.3.3. Pictorial presentation of weeds: During field observation, the PRA study team captured
photographs of weeds associated with the Zara/Colombo Lemon field. Simultaneously, study team
also collected relevant photographs from secondary sources. These pictures have been presented
as follows:

Plate-6.31: Asthma weed (Euphorbia hirta, Family: Euphorbiaceae, Order:
Euphorbiales) infestation

Plate-6.32: Sensitive weed (Mimosa pudica, Family: Fabaceae, Order: Fabales)
infestation

Plate-6.33: Dove weed (Murdannia nudiflora, Family: Commelinaceae, Order:
Commelinales) infestation

6.3. Management options for combating pests of Zara/Colombo Lemon
6.3.1. Management options for insect pests: According to the responses by the stakeholders, the
most effective and commonly practiced management options against the insect pests of
Zara/Colombo Lemonwere spraying insecticides in the orchard followed by removal of

unnecessary branches of the trees after harvesting fruits. Other important management options are
the use of balanced fertilizer, use of pheromone traps for capturing and killing of fruit flies,
removal of weeds from the orchards, irrigating the field along with granular insecticides to control
soil dwelling pests, cultivation of pest tolerant variety, application of IPM package.
6.3.2. Management options for diseases: The most effective and commonly practiced
management options against the diseases of Zara/Colombo Lemon were spraying of fungicide in
the orchards, pruning of the diseased and unnecessary branches from the trees. Other important
management options for controlling Zara/Colombo Lemon diseases were the removal of weeds
from the orchards, application of granular pesticides at the base of the Zara/Colombo lebu trees,
cultivation of disease tolerant variety, application of IPM packages.
6.3.3. Management options for weeds: According to the responses by the stakeholders, the most
effective and commonly practiced management options against the weeds of Zara/Colombo lebu
were weeding from the orchards particularly during seedling stages, spraying of herbicide at severe
stage of weed infestation in the orchard.
6.4. Possible ways of entry of quarantine pests into Bangladesh
Bangladesh usually imports most of the fresh citrus mainly from India and Bhutan through land
ports, while imports from other exporting countries such as Thailand, China, South Africa, Egypt,
Brazil and Australia through Airports. But no pests of citruses had yet been intercepted at port of
entry through any of the consignment of citrus imported in Bangladesh as reported by the Officials
of Plant Quarantine Wing (PQW), Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE), Ministry of
Agriculture, Bangladesh. However, there is a great possibility to enter any potential hazards (pests)
into Bangladesh through any consignment of fresh citrus fruits/saplings during importation if the
citrus is being imported without considering the standard phytosanitary system of International
Standard Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM).
6.5. Effective ways to prevent the entry of quarantine pests into Bangladesh
The entry of quarantine pests of Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lemonvarieties) can be prevented
by the consideration of phytosanitary measures as prescribed by the ISPM. Following steps can be
considered as reported by the stakeholders participated in the study:
• Assurance of phytosanitary certificate during importation of fresh citrus fruit/saplings from
exporting countries into Bangladesh;
• In case of high-risk rating pests, pre-inspection of fruits/saplings in the exporting countries
should be ensured;
• Existing legislation method should be implemented by following quarantine rules and
regulations;
• Standard phytosanitary activities should be followed during customs clearance of the
products;

• Strengthening the activities and monitoring system of quarantine centers under PQW, DAE
in Bangladesh;
• Illegal entry of seed and saplings of citruses from neighboring countries especially India
should be restricted applying legislation and awareness buildup of the respective
stakeholders;
• Intensify the co-operation with quarantine sectors of other countries particularly from where
Bangladesh usually imports citruses;
• Strengthening the laboratory capacity with modern equipment to inspect the imported
product properly considering standard phytosanitary system;
• Action oriented training should be provided for skill development of the quarantine
personnel of Plant Quarantine Wing (PQW) of Department of Agriculture Extension
(DAE).
6.6. Options to prevent the spread of quarantine pests of citrus within Bangladesh
The quarantine pests of citrus, if already entered into Bangladesh, can be prevented their spread
within the country considering the following steps as reported by the stakeholders participated in
the study:
• Proper identification of the quarantine pests;
• Awareness builds up among the growers/farmers and other stakeholders about quarantine
pests including their management;
• Restriction should be applied for the dissemination of infested citrus from pest infested areas
to pest free areas;
• Production of pest free citrus by the application of proper management for pests;
• Intensive and frequent inspection of citrus orchards by the experts;
• Following of quarantine rules and regulation,
• Proper training of the quarantine personnel particularly on quarantine pests of respective
crops along with their management options and phytosanitary measures.

6.7. Measures need to be taken by the exporters to export Zara/Colombo Lemon
• Pest free Zara/Colombo Lemon should be produced;
• Pre-and post-harvest phytosanitary technique should be followed;
• Pest infested/infected Zara/Colombo Lemon should be discarded from the lots;
• Proper grading for the quality Zara/Colombo Lemon fruits should be ensured;
• Before packing fruits should be treated with 2.3% sodium ortho-phenylephenate as
practiced by the Central Packing House, Plant Quarantine Wing, DAE;
• Proper packing should be followed;
• Graded and packed Zara/Colombo Lemon fruits should be preserved in cold storage;
• Phytosanitary certificate must be ensured before exporting Zara/Colombo Lemon.

6.8. References
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T., Latif, M.A. and Ahmed, S. (2014). Pest Risk Analysis
(PRA) of Citrus under Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project (SPCB), DAE.
Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project, Department of Agricultural
Extension, Kharmarbhari, Farmgate, Dhaka-1215.
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T., Latif, M.A., Rahman, M.A. and Ahmed, S. (2019).
Developing pest list of plants and plant products in Bangladesh. Strengthening phytosanitary
capacity in Bangladesh project. Plant Quarantine Wing. Department of Agricultural Extension.
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka-1215.
Akhter, M., Hasan, M., Tipu, M., Rahman, M., Islam, R., Faruk, M. and Nakahara, K.S. (2022). First report
of Citrus tristeza virus in Bangladesh. Australasian Plant Disease Notes. 17(12).
Alam, M.Z. (1962). Insect and Mite Pest of Fruits and Trees in East Pakistan and Their Control. East
Pakistan Govt. Press, Department of Agriculture, Dacca. 48-59p.
CABI/EPPO. (2013). Bactrocera dorsalis. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK:
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/

Chapter 7: Potential Hazard Organism for Risk Assessment

7.1. Introduction
The pest risk assessment was done with the aim to determine Bangladesh’s phytosanitary measure
regarding the citrus imported from any exporting countries of Bhutan, Brazil, China, India, Egypt,
Pakistan, South Africa, USA, Thailand, Australia, and others into Bangladesh.

7.2. Pest Categorization: Identification of Quarantine Pests Likely to Follow the Pathway
7.2.1. Pests of citrus in the world
The pests associated with fresh fruits and planting materials of citrus in the world have been
categorized and listed below based on their scientific name, taxonomic position, common name,
plant parts affected, geographical distribution and their quarantine status for Bangladesh.
Seventy-eight (78) species of pests were recorded for citrus in the world of which 33 species were
insect pests, 4 species were mite pests, and 2 species were mollusks; the species of disease-causing
fungi were 18, bacteria 4, virus 4 and nematode 10. On the other hand, 3 species of weeds for citrus
were recorded in the world.

Among Table 7.1 depicted the lists of pests associated with the citrus that also occur in Bhutan,
Brazil, India, China, Egypt, Thailand, Pakistan, South Africa, USA and Australia and the absence
or presence of these pests in Bangladesh. Based on Table 7.1, any pest that meets all above criteria
selected for further risk assessment (Table 7.2).
7.2.2. Quarantine pests of citrus for Bangladesh
Fifteen (15) species of quarantine pests of citrus for Bangladesh were identified those were present
in Bhutan, Brazil, China, India, Egypt, Thailand, Pakistan, South Africa, USA and Australia, but
not in Bangladesh. Among these 15 species of quarantine pests, 7 were insect pests, 3 were mite
pests, 1 was fungi, 2 were bacteria and 2 were virus (Table 7.2).

The quarantine insect pests are Citrus longhorn beetle (Anoplophora chinensis), Citrus weevil
(Diaprepes abbreviates), African citrus psyllid (Trioza erytreae), Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly
(Ceratitis capitate), Queensland fruit fly (Bactrocera tryoni), South African citrus thrips
(Scirtothrips aurantia) and California Citrus thrips (Scirtothrips citri) (Table 7.2).
The quarantine mite pests are Citrus rust mite (Phyllocoptruta oleivora), Citrus bud mite (Aceria
sheldon) and Lewis spider mite (Eotetranychus lewisi).
On the other hand, five (5) disease causing pathogens identified as quarantine pests of citrus for
Bangladesh. Among the disease-causing quarantine pathogens 1 is fungus named Greasy spot
(Mycosphaerella citri), 2 are bacteria named Citrus variegated chlorosis (Xylella fastidiosa subsp.
Pauca) and Citrus stubborn (Spiroplasma citri) and 2 are virus named Citrus exocortis (Citrus
exocortis viroid) and Indian citrus ringspot virus (Indian citrus ringspot virus).

Table 7.1. Pests associated with citrus in the world and identification of quarantine organisms
SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Arthropod pests
A. Insect pests
Lemon
butterfly
Papilio
demoleus
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
APPPC (1987)
Afghanistan
EPPO (2022)
Bhutan
NHM (1891)
China
Tong (1993)
India
Choudhuri and Konar
Indonesia
Matsumoto (2002)
Kuwait
Al-Houty (1983)
Malaysia
Corbet and Pendlebury
Myanmar
Waterhouse (1993)
Nepal
Smith (1990)
Pakistan
Mangrio et al. (2020)
Philippines
Corbet and Pendlebury
Saudi Arabia
EPPO (2022)
Singapore
Waterhouse (1993)
Sri Lanka
Talbot (1939)
Thailand
Waterhouse (1993)
United Arab
Emirates
EPPO (2022)
Citrus leaf
miner
Phyllocnistis
citrella
Gracillariidae
Lepidoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
Bhutan
China
Gao et al. (2012)
India
Thakre and Soni (2017)
Indonesia
Waterhouse (1993)
Israel
EPPO (2022)
Japan
Mafi and Ohbayashi
Malaysia
EPPO (2022)
Myanmar
Waterhouse (1993)
Nepal
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Ullah et al. (2005)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Philippines
Waterhouse (1993)
Saudi Arabia
EPPO (2022)
Singapore
AVA (2001)
Sri Lanka
EPPO (2022)
Thailand
Waterhouse (1993)
Turkey
Gözel and Gözel (2014)
Vietnam
Waterhouse (1993)
France
Seebens et al. (2017)
Greece
EPPO (2022)
Italy
Seebens et al. (2017)
United States
Seebens et al. (2017)
Australia
Liu ZhongMin et al.
Argentina
Diez et al. (2006)
Brazil
Jaciani et al. (2009)
Egypt
EPPO (2022)

South Africa
Afghanistan
Fruit sucking
moth
Othreis spp.
Noctuidae
Lepidoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
Swallowtail
butterfly
Papilio polytes
Papilionidae
Lepidoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
India
China
Myanmar
Bhutan
Thailand
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
Japan
Malaysia
Citrus leaf
folder
Psorosticha
zizyphi
Depressariidae
Lepidoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
Lvovsky and
Fallahzadeh (2010)
Iran
United Arab
Emirates
Prins and Prins (2014)
Sri Lanka
Australia

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Bark and stem
borer/ Bark
eating
caterpillar
Indarbela
quadrinotata
Metarbelidae
Lepidoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
Beccaloni et al. (2003)
Sri Lanka
Beccaloni et al. (2003)
Orange spined
bug
Biprorulus
bibax
Pentatomidae
Coleoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Australia
James (1990)
Citrus stem
borer
Chelidonium
cinctum
Cerambycidae
Coleoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
United
Kingdom
Straw et al. (2015)
United States
Haack et al. (2010)
Italy
Hérard and
Roques (2009)
Citrus
longhorn
beetle
Anoplophora
chinensis
Cerambycidae
Coleoptera
Major
No
Yes
China
Yang et al. (2021)
Indonesia
EPPO (2022)
France
Malaysia
Philippines
Turkey
Yıldız (2017)
Japan
Fujiwara-Tsujii et al.
Italy
Seebens et al. (2017)
Citrus weevil
Diaprepes
abbreviatus
Curculionidae
Coleoptera
Minor
No
Yes
United States
EPPO (2022)
United
Kingdom
Netherlands
Sweden
Citrus red
scale
Aonidiella
aurantii
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Australia
Ebeling (1959)

Argentina
Brazil
South Africa
Bedford (1998)
India
Hayes (1970)
Citrus yellow
scale
Aonidiella
citrina
Diaspididae
Hemiptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
Wikipedia (2021)

Iran
Australia
Japan

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
China
USA
Citrus
mealybug
Planococcus
citri
Pseudococcu
s
filamentosus
Pseudococcidae
Hemiptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
CABI and EPPO (1999)

China
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
Italy
South Africa
India
Srinivasnaik et al.
Sri Lanka
Sirisena et al. (2013)
Myanmar
Waterhouse (1993)
France
Seebens et al. (2017)

Germany
United States
Australia
Greece
Szita et al. (2017)
Switzerland
Kozár et al. (1994)
Unite
Kingdom
Malumphy and Badmin
Argentina
Ben-Dov (1994)
Brazil
Lopes et al. (2019)
Egypt
Adly et al. (2016)

Citrus blackfly
Aleurocanthus
woglumi
Aleyrodidae
Hemiptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Akrivou et al. (2021)
Malaysia
South Africa
India
Singh et al. (2020)
Bhutan
Maciel (2015)

China
Myanmar
Nepal
Singapore
Sri Lanka

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
Vietnam
Pakistan
Tayyib (2014)
Argentina
Lopez et al. (2011)
Brazil
Gomes et al. (2019)
United States
Fletcher et al. (2004)
Citrus bug
Rhynchocoris
humeralis
Pentatomidae
Hemiptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Asian citrus
psyllid
Diaphorina
citri
Triozidae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)

Afghanistan
China
India
Indonesia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
France
Australia
Argentina
Malaysia
Leong et al. (2018)
Myanmar
Waterhouse (1993)
Bhutan
Lama and Amatya
Nepal
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Muhammad Arshad et
al. (2019)
Vietnam
Waterhouse (1993)
United States
Martini et al. (2018)
Brazil
Nava et al. (2007)
African citrus
psyllid
Trioza erytreae
Triozidae
Homoptera
Minor
No
Yes
South Africa
Massonie et al. (1976)
Saudi Arabia,
Belgium,
EPPO (2022)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Italy,
Netherlands,
Portugal
Greenhouse
whitefly
Trialeurodes
vaporarioru
m
Aleyrodidae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
Egypt
Nada et al. (2022)
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
China
Seebens et al. (2017)
India
Patial and Mehta (2008)
Indonesia
Nasruddin and Mound
Japan
Seebens et al. (2017)
Pakistan
Tayyib et al. (2014)
Philippines
EPPO (2022)
Sri Lanka
EPPO (2022)
Turkey
Erdogan et al. (2012)
France
EPPO (2022)
Germany
Seebens et al. (2017)
Greece
EPPO (2022)
Italy
Nannini et al. (2011)
Netherlands
Malumphy et al. (2009)
Spain
Alfaro-Fernández et al.
Sweden
Byrne et al. (1990)
United
Kingdom
Seebens et al. (2017)
Mexico
Méndez-Lozano et al.
United States
Byrne et al. (1990)
Australia
Gambley et al. (2010)
New Zealand
Seebens et al. (2017)
Argentina
Van Nieuwenhove et al.
Brazil
Fernandez et al. (2022)
Citrus whitefly
Dialeurodes
citri
Aleyrodidae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
Afghanistan
China
India

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Japan
United States
Argentina
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
France
Seebens et al. (2017)
Italy
Pakistan
Tayyib et al. (2014)
Spain
Franco et al. (2006)
Striped
mealybug
Ferrisia virgata
Pseudococcidae
Homoptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
Newstead (1894)
Sri Lanka
Green (1896)
Black citrus
aphid
Toxoptera
citricida
Aphididae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
Bhutan
China
Australia
Argentina
Brazil
Malaysia
Myanmar
Nepal
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Italy
United States
Seebens et al. (2017)
Oriental fruit
fly
Bactrocera
dorsalis
Tephritidae
Diptera
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Leblanc et al. (2013)
Bhutan
CABI/EPPO (2013)
China
Seebens et al. (2017)
India
Akbar et al. (2019)
Malaysia
Leblanc et al. (2015)
Myanmar
Aketarawong et al.
Nepal
Ganie et al. (2013a)
Pakistan
Abro et al. (2020)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Singapore
Mahmood (2004)
Sri Lanka
Khamis et al. (2012)
Thailand
Haq et al. (2016)
United Arab
Emirates
EPPO (2022)
France
Italy
Nugnes et al. (2018)
United States
Leblanc et al. (2015)
South Africa
IPPC (2020)
Mediterranean
fruit
fly/Medfly
Ceratitis
capitata
Tephritidae
Diptera
Minor
No
Yes
Egypt
Kourti et al. (1992)
South Africa
Munro (1929)
Australia
Gasparich et al. (1997)
China
CABI and EPPO
Queensland
fruit fly
Bactrocera
tryoni
Tephritidae
Diptera
Minor
No
Yes
Singapore,
Netherlands,
United States,
Australia, New
Zealand, Chile
EPPO (2022),
Cameron et al.
(2010), Bateman
Termite
Odontotermes
obesus
Termitidae
Isoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Flower thrips
Frankliniella
schultzei
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips
dorsalis
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
China
Mirab-Balou et al.
India
Kumar and Rachana
Japan
Toda et al. (2014)
Malaysia
Aliakbarpour and Rawi
Myanmar
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Australia
Vietnam

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Netherlands
NPPO of the
Netherlands (2013)
United States
Seebens et al. (2017)
Thailand
Toda et al. (2014)
Brazil
Dias-Pini et al. (2018)
South African
citrus thrips
Scirtothrips
aurantii
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Minor
No
Yes
Egypt
Agamy et al. (2017)
South Africa
Bara and Laing (2019)
United
Kingdom
EFSA PLH Panel (2018)
Australia
Mound and Tree (2020)
California
Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips
citri
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
Minor
No
Yes
China
Li et al., 2003
India
EPPO, 2000
Iran
Akbari and Seraj, 2007
Green citrus
aphid
Aphis
spiraecola
Aphididae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
UK, CAB International
Egypt
Wijs (1974)
Morocco
UK, CAB International
South Africa
Gilbert (1994)
China
Zhang et al. (1997)
India
Joshi and Sangma
Iran
Hodjat and Eastop
Israel
Swirski et al. (1991)
Japan
UK, CAB International
Malaysia
UK, CAB International
Maldives
UK, CAB International
Nepal
UK, CAB International
Pakistan
Riaz et al. (2022)
Philippines
Quimio and Calilung

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Singapore
UK, CAB International
Sri Lanka
UK, CAB International
Thailand
UK, CAB International
Turkey
Alaserhat et al. (2021)
France
Seebens et al. (2017)
Greece
Katsoyannos et al.
Italy
Seebens et al. (2017)
Netherlands
Furk (1979)
Spain
Cambra et al. (2004)
Switzerland
UK, CAB International
United
Kingdom
Borbély et al. (2021)
United States
Seebens et al. (2017)
Australia
UK, CAB International
New Zealand
Seebens et al. (2017)
Argentina
Portillo (1988)
Brazil
UK, CAB International
Citrus soft
scale
Coccus
hesperidum
Coccidae
Homoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
CABI/EPPO (2013)
India
Nepal
Bhutan
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
Afghanistan
Myanmar
Thailand
Indonesia
Malaysia
Australia

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
New Zealand
Japan
Sweden
United
Kingdom
Netherlands
France
Spain
Greece
Egypt
United Arab
Emirates
Germany
Italy
Argentina
Brazil
United States
Mexico
Citrus green
stink bug
Nezara
viridula
Pentatomidae
Hemiptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Uddin et al. (2013)
Egypt
Rizk et al. (1990)
South Africa
Annecke and Moran
Afghanistan
Hoberlandt (1984)
China
Li (1985)
India
Vidya et al. (2015)
Indonesia
Chu (1979)
Japan
Yukawa et al. (2007)
Malaysia
UK, CAB International
Myanmar
Waterhouse (1993)
Nepal
Gautam and Acharya
Pakistan
UK, CAB International
Philippines
Waterhouse (1993)
Saudi Arabia
UK, CAB International

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Sri Lanka
Rajendram and
Devarajah (1990)
Thailand
Waterhouse (1993)
France
UK, CAB International
Germany
UK, CAB International
Greece
UK, CAB International
Italy
Colazza and Bin (1995)
Spain
UK, CAB International
United
Kingdom
Seebens et al. (2017)
United States
Looney et al. (2019)
Australia
Clarke (1992)
New Zealand
Seebens et al. (2017)
Argentina
Porta (1992)
Brazil
Ricalde et al. (2015)
Citrus fire
ant
Solenopsis
invicta
Formicidae
Hymenoptera
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed et al. (2019)
China
Seebens et al. (2017)
Malaysia
ISSG (2014)
Mexico
Salas-Araiza et al.
United States
Williams et al. (2021)
Australia
IPPC (2010)
Argentina
Folgarait et al. (2008)
Brazil
Pesquero and PenteadoDias (2004)
B. Mite
Citrus red mite
Panonychus
citri
Tetranychidae
Acarina
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
EPPO (2022)
Sri Lanka
China
Thailand
Taiwan
Philippines

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Malaysia
Russia
France
United
Kingdom
Spain
Turkey
Switzerland
United States
Argentina
Brazil
Citrus rust
mite
Phyllocoptruta
oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarina
Minor
No
Yes
China
Tropea Garzia and De
Lillo (2018)
United States
Hoy (2011)
Vietnam
EPPO (2022)
Argentina
Italy
Brazil
India
Philippines
Australia
Tropea Garzia and De
Lillo (2018)

Japan
Turkey
South Africa
Citrus bud
mite
Aceria sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarina
Minor
No
Yes
Egypt
EPPO (2022)
South Africa
Argentina
Brazil
United States
India
Indonesia
Greece
Italy
Australia
Lewis spider
mite
Eotetranychus
lewisi
Tetranychidae
Acarina
Minor
No
Yes
South Africa,
Japan, Iran,
Taiwan
EPPO (2022)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
C. Mollusk
Grey garden
slug
Deroceras
reticulatum
Limacidae
Stylommatop
hora
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Field survey
South Africa
Seebens et al. (2017)
Sri Lanka
Maheshini et al. (2019)
Turkey
Yıldırım and Kebapçı
France
Hommay (1995)
Germany
Kerney et al. (1979)
Netherlands
Ester and Nijënstein
Spain
Castillejo (1996)
Sweden
Kerney et al. (1979)
Switzerland
Kerney et al. (1979)
United
Kingdom
Glen et al. (1991)
United States
McDonnell et al. (2014)
Australia
Young (1996)
New Zealand
Barker (1989)
Argentina
Seebens et al. (2017)
Brown
garden snail
Cornu
aspersum
Helicidae
Stylommatop
hora
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Field survey
Egypt
Zidan et al. (1997)
South Africa
Seebens et al. (2017)
China
Seebens et al. (2017)
Philippines
Khalil et al. (1991)
Saudi Arabia
El-Wakil et al. (2011)
Thailand
Pattarmanon (1987)
Turkey
Yıldırım et al. (2004)
France
Beeby and Richmond
Germany
Seebens et al. (2017)
Greece
Vokou et al. (1998)
Italy
Godan (1983)
Netherlands
Kerney (1999)
Spain
Iglesias and Castillejo
Sweden
Taylor (1914)
Switzerland
Seebens et al. (2017)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
United
Kingdom
Seebens et al. (2017)
Mexico
Godan (1983)
United States
Grimm et al. (2009)
Australia
CFIA (2009)
New Zealand
Seebens et al. (2017)
Argentina
González et al. (2009)
Brazil
Escargots Funcia (2009)
Disease pests
A. Fungi
Anthracnose
Colletotrichum
gloesporiodies
Glomerellaceae
Glomerellales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Brazil
Lima et al. 2013
India
Sharma et al. 2013
Australia
Shivas et al. 2016
China
Mo et al. 2018)
Philippines
Weir et al. 2012
Thailand
Weir et al. 2012
Die-back
Fusarium
solani
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
China
Xu et al. 2016
Die-back
Phomopsis citri
Valsaceae
Diaporthales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Egypt
EPPO (2022)
South Africa
Argentina
Brazil
Myanmar
Pakistan
Philippines
Thailand
United
Kingdom
United States
Farr et al. (1989)
China
Zhang and Huang
India
Srivastava (1982)
Indonesia
Fawcett (1936)
Australia
Bertus (1981)
Gummosis
Peronosporaceae
Peronosporales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Phytophthora
citrophthora
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
United
Kingdom
China
United States
Vietnam
Malaysia
Australia
Brazil
Egypt
France
Greece
India
Indonesia
Italy
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Thailand
Scab
Elsinoe
fawcettii
Elsinoaceae
Myriangiales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
South Africa
Villiers and Milne
Brazil
Mendes et al. (2019)
United States
Whiteside (1980)
China
Hou et al. (2014)
India
ICAR (2010)
Indonesia
EPPO (2022)
Malaysia
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Australia
Jeffress et al. (2020)
Sooty mould
Capnodium
citri
Capnodiaceae
Caapnodiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
DAE (2019)
India
EPPO (2022)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Pakistan
Australia
Italy
Brazil
United States
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella
citri
Mycosphaerellac
eae
Capnodiales
Minor
No
Yes
United States
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Argentina
Brazil
Egypt
China
Japan
Australia
Black mould
Aspergillus
niger
Trichocomaceae
Eurotiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Nepal
Myanmar
Thailand
China
Philippines
Indonesia
Australia
Egypt
Greece
Italy
France
Germany
United
Kingdom
United States
Brazil
Argentina
Powdery
mildew
Oidium citri
Erysiphaceae
Erysiphales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
France
Lemaire et al. (1999)
Germany
Lebeda and Mieslerova

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Italy
Stravato (1993)
Switzerland
Bolay (1998)
United
Kingdom
Fletcher et al. (1988)
Bhutan
Kiss et al. (2001)
China
India
Malaysia
Nepal
Thailand
Argentina
Weht et al. (1997)
Pink disease
Botryobasidium
salmonicolor
Corticiaceae
Corticiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Myanmar
Thailand
China
Indonesia
Philippines
Australia
Brazil
United States
Wilt
Fusarium spp.
Nectriaceae
Hypocreales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
EPPO (2022)
Nepal
EPPO (2022)
China
Australia
Sweden
United
Kingdom
France
Egypt
United States
Brazil

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Argentina
Bark rot
Melanomma
citricola
Melanommatace
ae
Pleosporales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Stem-end rot
Lasiodiplodia
pseudotheobro
mae
Botryosphaeriace
ae
Botryosphaerial
es
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
China
EPPO (2022)
Black spot of
citrus
Phyllosticta
citricarpa
Phyllostictaceae
Botryosphaerial
es
Minor
No
Yes
South Africa
Martinez-Minaya et al.
Argentina
Duran et al., (2005)
Brazil
Sposito et al. (2011)
United States
Stocks (2012)
Bhutan
EPPO (2022)
China
Zhang and Huang
India
Das et al. (2018)
Indonesia
USDA (1982)
Philippines
Australia
Paul et al. (2005)
Melanose
Diaporthe
citri
Diaporthaceae
Diaporthales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
EPPO (2022)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
EPPO (2022)
Myanmar
EPPO (2022)
Thailand
EPPO (2022)
China
EPPO (2022)
Indonesia
EPPO (2022)
Philippines
EPPO (2022)
Japan
EPPO (2022)
Australia
EPPO (2022)
New Zealand
EPPO (2022)
Egypt
EPPO (2022)
Turkey
EPPO (2022)
United Arab
Emirats
EPPO (2022)
United States
EPPO (2022)
Mexico
EPPO (2022)
Argentina
EPPO (2022)
Brazil
EPPO (2022)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
Blue/Green
mold
Penicillium
sp.
Trichocomace
ae
Eurotiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2014)
Damping
off
Pythium sp.
Pythiaceae
Peronosporal
es
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2014)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
EPPO (2022)
Sri Lanka
EPPO (2022)
Thailand
EPPO (2022)
Indonesia
EPPO (2022)
China
EPPO (2022)
Philippines
EPPO (2022)
Japan
EPPO (2022)
Australia
EPPO (2022)
Norway
EPPO (2022)
United
Kingdom
EPPO (2022)
Netherlands
EPPO (2022)
France
EPPO (2022)
Spain
EPPO (2022)
Greece
EPPO (2022)
Egypt
EPPO (2022)
United States
EPPO (2022)
Mexico
EPPO (2022)
Argentina
EPPO (2022)
Brazil
EPPO (2022)
Damping
off
Rhizoctonia
solani
Ceratobasidia
ceae
Cantharellales Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2014)
United
Kingdom
Wikipedia (2023)
Australia
Wikipedia (2023)
Canada
Wikipedia (2023)
India
Wikipedia (2023)
Foam
disease
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2014)
Bacteria
Citrus canker
Xanthomonadace
ae
Xanthomonadal
es
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Vernière et al. (2013)
China
Ye et al. (2013)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Xanthomona
s axonopodis
pv. citri
India
Savitha et al. (2016)
Indonesia
Li et al. (2007)
Italy
Sri Lanka
Myanmar
Nepal
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Philippines
Australia
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
Malaysia
Arshadi et al. (2013)
Argentina
Paola et al. (2013)
United States
Lin et al. (2012)
Brazil
Citrus
greening
Candidatus
Liberibacter
asiaticus
Phyllobacteriace
ae
Rhizobiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Tipu et al. (2017)
Bhutan
Donovan et al. (2012)
Indonesia
Wirawan et al. (2019)
China
Qian WenJuan et al.
India
Singh et al. (2019)
Malaysia
EPPO (2022)
Myanmar
Nepal
Chhetri et al. (2019)
Citrus
variegated
chlorosis
Xylella
fastidiosa
subsp. pauca
Xanthomonadace
ae
Xanthomonadal
es
Minor
No
Yes
France
EPPO (2022)
Italy
Spain
Argentina
Tolocka et al. (2017)
Brazil
Coletta-Filho et al.
Citrus
stubborn
Spiroplasma
citri
Mycoplasmatace
ae
Mycoplasmatal
es
Minor
No
Yes
Egypt
CABI and EPPO (2015)
France
Greece
Italy
Spain
Turkey

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
United States
Virus
Citrus Tristeza
Virus
Citrus tristeza
virus
Closteroviridae
Martellivirales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Akhter et al. (2022)
Bhutan
Ghosh et al. (2020)
China
Cheng et al. (2011)
India
Singh et al. (2022)
Indonesia
Kusmo (1990)
Japan
Nagaoka-Nakazono et
al. (2020)
Malaysia
Reuther et al. (1978)
Nepal
Brunt et al. (1996)
Pakistan
Abbas et al. (2015)
Philippines
Price (1971)
Sri Lanka
Brunt et al. (1996)
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
Al Shuraiki (1997)
Vietnam
Brunt et al. (1996)
France
NPPO (2013)
Greece
Chatzivassiliou and
Nolasco (2014)
Italy
Ferretti et al. (2014)
Spain
Ann. (2007)
Australia
Brlansky et al. (2002)
Egypt
Amin et al. (2006)
South Africa
Read and Pietersen
Argentina
Read et al. (2018)
Brazil
Loeza-Kuk et al. (2008)
United States
Ali et al. (2021)
Citrus
exocortis
Citrus exocortis
viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
Minor
No
Yes
India
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Pakistan
Thailand
China
Japan

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Philippines
Indonesia
Australia
Egypt
United Arab
Emirates
Saudi Arabia
Turkey
Greece
Italy
France
Unites States
Argentina
Brazil
Indian citrus
ringspot virus
Indian citrus
ringspot virus
Alphaflexivirida
e
Tymovirales
Minor
No
Yes
India
CABI and EPPO (2015)

Pakistan
Psorosis
Citrus
Psorosis
virus
Aspiviridae
Serpentoviral
es
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2014)
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
Argentina
EPPO (2022)
United States
EPPO (2022)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
EPPO (2022)
France
EPPO (2022)
Greece
EPPO (2022)
Italy
EPPO (2022)
Nematode
Root lesion
Criconemoides
sp.
Criconematidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Root lesion
Hoplolaimus
indicus
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
CABI/EPPO (2013)
India
Pakistan
Nepal
China
Root lesion
Radopholus
similis
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Egypt
EPPO (2022)
South Africa
China

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Australia
Indonesia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
France
Italy
Netherlands
NPPO of the
Netherlands (2013)
India
Sundararaju (2006)
United States
Wang and Hooks (2009)
Malaysia
Rahman et al. (2014)
Brazil
Lima et al. (2013)
Root lesion
Pratylenchus
spp.
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Stem injury
Ditylenchus
dipsaci
Anguinidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
Japan
Denmark
Sweden
United
Kingdom
Turkey
Australia
Argentina
China
Seebens et al. (2017)
Indonesia
Ajri et al. (2021)
Pakistan
Khan et al. (2007)
France
Subbotin et al. (2005)
Germany
Mwaura et al. (2015)
Greece
Archidona-Yuste et al.
Italy
Greco (2021)
United States
French et al. (2017)
Brazil
Subbotin et al. (2005)

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Root decay
Helicotylenchus
sp.
Hoplolaimidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
DAE (2019)
Australia
Zeng et al. (2012)
United States
Turkey
Akyazi et al. (2017)
India
EPPO (2022)
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Bhutan
Thailand
Indonesia
Philippines
China
Japan
Germany
Italy
Egypt
Brazil
Root decay
Tylenchus
semipenetrans
Tylenchulidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Egypt
Ibrahim and Handoo
South Africa
EPPO (2022)
Afghanistan
China
India
Japan
Malaysia
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Turkey
France
Greece
Italy
United States
Australia
Argentina

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Brazil
Pakistan
Safdar et al. (2010)
Root decay
Xiphinema spp.
Longidoridae
Dorylaimida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Japan
EPPO (2022)
France
United States
Root injury
Hoplotylus spp.
Pratylenchidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
Japan
Palomares-Rius et al.
United States
New Zealand
Poland
Spain
Discoloration
Tylenchorhynch
us sp.
Belonolaimidae
Tylenchida
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Ahmed (2019)
India
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Pakistan
China
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Australia
Japan
Turkey
Egypt
Brazil
United States
Weed
Bara dudhia
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbiales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Holm et al. (1979)
Saudi Arabia
Sri Lanka
Thailand
United Arab
Emirates
Vietnam

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Argentina
South Africa
China
Mukhtar and Peer
India
Nayak and Babu (2019)
Indonesia
Waterhouse (1993)
Myanmar
Japan
Ohwi (1965)
Malaysia
Hakim et al. (2013)
Nepal
Moody (1989)
Pakistan
Mehsud et al. (2013)
Singapore
Seebens et al. (2017)
Bhutan
United States
Australia
Mexico
Vázquez-Marrufo et al.
Brazil
Lopes et al. (2019)
Sensitive plant
Mimosa pudica
Fabaceae
Fabales
Major
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Moody (1989)
Bhutan
Seebens et al. (2017)
Nepal
Singapore
Sweden
Australia
China
Flora of China Editorial
Committee (2017)
India
Borah et al. (2018)
Indonesia
Affandi et al. (2019)
Japan
PIER (2017)
Maldives
Malaysia
Aliakbarpour and Rawi

SN
Common
Name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest
status
Presence in
Bangladesh
Quarantine
status
Distribution
References
Philippines
Waterhouse (1993)
Myanmar
Vietnam
Pakistan
Ali (1973)
Sri Lanka
Fairchild (1902)
Thailand
Moody (1989)
United States
USDA-NRCS (2017)
Brazil
Lopes et al. (2019)
South Africa
Wells et al. (1986)
Doveweed
Murdannia
nudiflora
Commelinaceae
Commelinales
Minor
Yes
No
Bangladesh
Galinato et al. (1999)
Bhutan
Noltie (1994)
China
Flora of China Editorial
Committee (2017)
India
Govaerts (2017)
Malaysia
Philippines
Japan
USDA-ARS (2017)
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
United States
Australia
Atlas of Living
Australia (2017)
Brazil
Aona and Pellegrini
South Africa
Holm et al. (1977)

Table 7.2. Quarantine pests for Bangladesh likely to be associated with citrus imported from fruit/planting materials exporting countries

Sl.
No.
Common name
Scientific name
Distribution to citrus
exporting countries
Plant parts likely to
carry the pest
References
Arthropods
Insect pests
Citrus longhorn beetle
Anoplophora chinensis
Family: Cerambycidae
Order: Coleoptera
China
Woody plants
EPPO (2002)
Citrus weevil
Diaprepes abbreviates
Family: Curculionidae
Order: Coleoptera
USA, United Kingdom
Plant material
EPPO (2002)
Aftican citrus psyllid
Trioza erytreae
Family: Triozidae
Order: Homoptera
South Africa
Leaf, stem
EPPO (2022)
Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitate
Family: Tephritidae
Order: Diptera
Egypt, South Africa,
Australia, China
Fruit
CABI and EPPO (2015)
Queensland fruit fly
Bactrocera tryoni
Family: Tephritidae
Order: Diptera
United States, Australia
Fruit
EPPO (2022)
South African citrus thrips
Scirtothrips aurantia
Family: Thripidae
Order: Thysanoptera
Egypt, South Africa,
Australia, United
Kingdom
Plant, Fruit, Leaf
Wikipedia (2021)
California Citrus thrips
Scirtothrips citri
Family: Thripidae
Order: Thysanoptera
China, India
Plant, Fruit, Leaf
EPPO (2022)
Mite
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Family: Eriophyidae
Order: Acarina
China, USA, India, South
Africa, Argentina, Brazil
Plant parts
Hoy (2011)
Citrus bud mite
Aceria Sheldon
Family: Eriophyidae
Order: Acarina
Egypt, South Africa,
United States, Argentina,
Brazil, India, Australia
Plant parts
EPPO (2002)
Lewis spider mite
Eotetranychus lewisi
Family: Tetranychidae
Order: Acarina
South Africa
Plant parts
EPPO (2022)
Diseases
Fungi

Sl.
No.
Common name
Scientific name
Distribution to citrus
exporting countries
Plant parts likely to
carry the pest
References
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Family: Mycosphaerellaceae
Order: Capnodiales
Egypt, China, Australia,
United States, Argentina,
Brazil
Plant material
CABI/EPPO (2013)
Bacteria
Citrus variegated chlorosis
Xylella
fastidiosa
subsp.
Pauca
Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Order: Xanthomonadales
Argentina, Brazil
Plant material
EPPO (2022)
Citrus stubborn
Spiroplasma citri
Family: Mycoplasmataceae
Order: Mycoplasmatales
Egypt, Pakistan, United
States
Plant material
EPPO (2022)
Virus
Citrus exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Family: Pospiviroidae
Order: Incertae sedis
India, Pakistan, China,
Egypt, Thailand,
Australia, United States,
Argentina, Brazil
Plant material
EPPO (2022)
Indian citrus ringspot virus
Indian citrus ringspot virus
Family: Alphaflexiviridae
Order: Tymovirales
India, Pakistan
Plant material
CABI and EPPO (2015)

7.2.3 References
Abbas, M., Khan, M.M., Mughal, S.M. and Ji, P. (2015). Comparison of infection of Citrus tristeza closterovirus in
Kinnow mandarin (Citrus reticulata) and Mosambi sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) in Pakistan. Crop
Protection. 78: 146-150.
Abro, Z.A., Baloch, N., Memon, R.M., Khuhro, N.H., Soomro, Q.A. (2020). Population variations of fruit flies,
Bactrocera spp. in mango orchards of Hyderabad and Larkana Sindh. Pure App. Bio. 9(1): 949-955.
DOI:10.19045/bspab.2020.90099
Adly, D., Fadl, H.A.A.A. and Mousa, S.F.M. (2016). Survey and seasonal abundance of mealybug species, their
parasitoids and associated predators on guava trees in Egypt. Egy. J. Biol. Pest Con. 26(3): 657-664.
http://www.ejbpc.com/
Agamy, E., El-Husseini, M., El- Sebaey, I. and Wafy, M. (2017). The Egyptian Thripid species in olive groves at
Ismaialia, Egypt. Egy. Aca. J. Biol. Sci. A. Entom. 10(4): 1-17. doi: 10.21608/eajb.2017.12180
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T., Latif, M.A. and Ahmed, S. (2014). Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of
Citrus under Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project (SPCB), DAE. Strengthening
Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project, Department of Agricultural Extension, Kharmarbhari,
Farmgate, Dhaka-1215.
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T., Latif, M.A., Rahman, M.A. and Ahmed, S. (2019). Developing
pest list of plants and plant products in Bangladesh. Strengthening phytosanitary capacity in Bangladesh
project. Plant Quarantine Wing. Department of Agricultural Extension. Khamarbari, Farmgate, DhakaAjri, M., Indarti, S., Soffan, A., Huu, N.N. (2021). Morphological and phylogenetic characteristics of Ditylenchus
dipsaci among garlic plants. Jordan Journal of Biological Sciences (JJBS). 14(4): 769-773.
https://jjbs.hu.edu.jo/files/vol14/n4/Binder14n4.pdf
Akbar, S.A., Nabi, S.U., Mansoor, S. and Khan, K.A, (2019). Morpho-molecular identification and a new host
report of Bactrocera dorsalis (Hendel) from the Kashmir valley (India). Inter. J. Trop. Insect Sci. 40(2):
315-325. DOI:10.1007/s42690-019-00083-w
Aketarawong, N., Guglielmino, C.R., Karam, N., Falchetto, M., Manni, M., Scolari, F., Gomulski, L.M., Gasperi,
G. and Malacrida, A.R. (2014). The oriental fruitfly Bactrocera dorsalis s.s. in East Asia: disentangling
the different forces promoting the invasion and shaping the genetic make-up of populations. Genetica.
142(3): 201-213. DOI:10.1007/s10709-014-9767-4
Akhter, M., Hasan, M., Tipu, M., Rahman, M., Islam, R., Faruk, M. and Nakahara, K.S. (2022). First report of
Citrus tristeza virus in Bangladesh. Australasian Plant Disease Notes. 17(12).
Akrivou, A., Georgopoulou, I., Papachristos, D., Milonasm, P.G. and Kriticos, D.J. (2021). Potential global
distribution of Aleurocanthus woglumi considering climate change and irrigation. PLoS ONE. 16(12):
e0261626. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261626
Akyazi, F., Yigit, U. and Tonkaz, T. (2017). Distribution of spiral nematodes (Helicotylenchus spp.) in corn growing
areas in coastal provinces of Turkey bordering the Black sea. Comm. Appl. Biol. Sci, Ghent University.
82(3): 287-294.
Alfaro-Fernández, A., Córdoba-Sellés, M., Juárez, M., Herrera-Vásquez, J.Á., Sánchez-Navarro, J.Á., Cebrián,
M.C., Font, M.I. and Jordá, C. (2010). Occurrence and geographical distribution of the 'Torrado' disease
in Spain. Journal of Phytopathology. 158(7/8): 457-469.
Al-Houty, W. (1983). Butterflies and hawkmoths of Kuwait. Entom. Rec. J. Var. 95(9-10): 202-204.
Alaserhat, İ., Canbay, A. and Özdemir, I. (2021). Aphid species, their natural enemies in vegetables from erzincan,
Turkey: first record of the parasitoid wasp Aphelinus Mali (haldeman) parasitizing Lipaphis erysimi
(kaltenbach). Tarim Bilimleri Dergisi. 27(1): 16-25.
Al Shuraiki, R.K. (1997). Disease and pest outbreaks – United Arab Emirates. Citrus tristeza in the United Arab
Emirates. Arab and Near East Plant Protection Newsletter (FAO). no. 25, p 27.
Ali, E., Bennett, A., Stackhouse, T., Walliullah, S. and Oliver, J.E. (2021). First report of citrus tristeza virus
infecting citrus trees in Georgia, USA. Plant Disease. 105(7): 2024.
Aliakbarpour, H. and Rawi, M.C.S. (2011). Seasonal abundance and spatial distribution of larval and adult thrips
(Thysanoptera) on weed host plants in mango orchards in Penang, Malaysia. App. Entom. Zoo. 46(2): 185-
194. DOI:10.1007/s13355-011-0030-5
Amin, H.A., Fonseca, F., Santos, C. and Nolasco, G. (2006). Typing of Egyptian Citrus tristeza virus (CTV) isolates
based on the capsid protein gene. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 45(1): 10-14.
Annecke, D.P. and Moran, V.C. (1982). Insects and mites of cultivated plants in South Africa. Durban, South
Africa: Butterworth. xiv + 383 pp.
Anonymous. (2007). Incidencia de plagas y enfermedades en las Comunidades Autónomas en 2006. Phytoma-
España. no. 187, 19-52 and no. 188, 16-56.

APPPC. (1987). Insect pests of economic significance affecting major crops of the countries in Asia and the Pacific
region. In: Technical Document No. 135, Bangkok, Thailand: Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
region (RAPA).
Archidona-Yuste, A., Cantalapiedra-Navarrete, C., Palomares-Rius, J.E., Castillo, P. and Tzortzakakis, E.A. (2020).
Plant-parasitic nematodes associated with cultivated and wild olive trees in Crete, Greece. Hellenic Plant
Protection Journal. 13(1): 24-28. DOI:10.2478/hppj-2020-0003
Arshad, M., Ullah, M.I., Çagatay, N.S., Dikmen, F., Abdullah, A. and Afzal, M. (2019). Cordia myxa L., a new
host plant record for Asian citrus psyllid, Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. Southwestern Entom. 44(1): 331-
334. DOI:10.3958/059.044.0137
Arshadi, F., Sijam, K. and Awang, Y. (2013). Genetic diversity of Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri, causal agent of
citrus canker. J. Plant Prot. Res. 53(4): 312-316.
AVA. (2001). Diagnostic records of the Plant Health Diagnostic Services., Singapore: Plant Health Centre Agrifood & Veterinary Authority.
Bara, G.T. and Laing, M.D. (2019). Determination of the natural host status of avocado fruit to pestiferous thrips
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Afr. Entom. 27(1): 245-253.
https://doi.org/10.4001/003.027.0245
Barker, G.M. (1989). Slug problems in New Zealand pastoral agriculture. In: Monograph - British Crop Protection
Council, 59-68.
Beccaloni, G., Scoble, M., Kitching, I., Simonsen, T., Robinson, G., Pitkin, B., Hine, A. and Lyal, C. (2003).
Indarbela quadrinotata. The Global Lepidoptera Names Index. Nat. His. Museum. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
Bedford, E.C.G. (1998). Red scale Aonidiella auranii (Maskell). In: Citrus pests in the Republic of South Africa.
Bedford, E.C.G., Berg, M.A.V. and Villiers, E.A.D. Dynamic Ad., Nelspruit, South Africa. pp: 132–134.
Beeby, A. and Richmond, L. (2007). Differential growth rates and calcium-allocation strategies in the garden snail
Cantareus aspersus. Journal of Molluscan Studies. 73(1): 105-112.
Ben-Dov, Y. (1994). A systematic catalogue of the mealybugs of the world (Insecta: Homoptera: Coccoidea:
Pseudococcidae and Putoidae) with data on geographical distribution, host plants, biology and economic
importance. In: A systematic catalogue of the mealybugs of the world (Insecta: Homoptera: Coccoidea:
Pseudococcidae and Putoidae) with data on geographical distribution, host plants, biology and economic
importance. Andover, UK: Intercept Limited. 686 pp.
Bertus, A.L. (1981). Australasian Plant Pathology. 10(3): 53-55.
Bolay, A. (1998). Revue Suisse de Viticulture. d'Arboriculture et d'Horticulture. 30(6): 373-378.
Borbély, C., György, Z., Jacobsen, S.K., Musa, F., Ourednícková, J., Sigsgaard, L., Skalský, M. and Markó, V.
(2021). First records of the invasive aphid species, Aphis spiraecola, in Kosovo, Slovakia, the Czech
Republic, the United Kingdom and Denmark. Plant Protection Science. 57(1): 70-74.
Brlansky, R.H., Howd, D.S., Broadbent, P. and Damsteegt, V.D. (2002). Histology of Sweet Orange Stem Pitting
Caused by an Australian Isolate of Citrus tristeza virus. Plant Disease. 86(10): 1169-1174.
Brunt, A., Crabtree, K., Dallwitz, M., Gibbs, A. and Watson, L. (1996). Viruses of plants, 409-411. CAB
International, Wallingford, UK.
Byrne, D.N., Bellows, T.S. and Parella, M.P. (1990). Whiteflies in agricultural systems. In: Whiteflies: their
bionomics, pest status and management, [ed. by Gerling D]. Andover, UK: Intercept Limited. P227-261.
CABI/EPPO. (2013). Bactrocera dorsalis. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests, Wallingford,
UK:
CABI, EPPO. (1999). Planococcus citri. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests, Wallingford,
UK: CAB International. Map 43. DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20066600043
Cambra, M., Gorris, M.T., Capote, N., Asensio, M., Martínez, M.C., Bertolini, E., Collado, C., Hermoso, Mendoza,
A., Mataix, E. and López, A. (2004). Epidemiology of Plum pox virus in Japanese plums in Spain. Acta
Horticulturae. 195-200.
Castillejo, J. (1996). (Las babosas come plaga en la agricultura. Claves de identification y mapas de distribucion).
In: Revista Real Academia Galega de Ciencias, 15 93-142.
CFIA. (2009). Helix aspersa (Müller) - European brown garden snail. In: Pest Fact Sheet. Ottawa, Canada: Canadian
Food Inspection Agency. http://www.inspection.ca/english/plaveg/pestrava/helasp/tech/helaspe.shtml
Chatzivassiliou, E.K. and Nolasco, G. (2014). Detection of a new variant of Citrus tristeza virus in Greek citrus
crops. Phytopathologia Mediterranea. 53(1): 140-147.
Cheng, X.F., Wu, J.X., Ma, X.Y., Fu, H.F. and Wu, X.Y. (2011). First report of Citrus tristeza virus in Citrus
changshanensis cv. Huyou in Zhejiang, China. Journal of Plant Pathology. 93(4S): S4.68.
Choudhuri, S. and Konar, A. (2007). Population build up of lepidopteran insects on pummelo (Citrus grandis L.)
in alluvial zone of West Bengal. J. Entomol. Res. 31(2): 97-99.
Chu, Y.I. (1979). Some notes on the lepidopterous rice insect pests at Jawa Timur, Indonesia. NTU [National
Taiwan University] Phytopathologist and Entomologist. 38-43.
Clarke, A.R. (1992). Current distribution and pest status of Nezara viridula (L.) (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae) in
Australia. Journal of the Australian Entomological Society. 31(4): 289-297.

Colazza, S. and Bin, F. (1995). Efficiency of Trissolcus basalis (Hymenoptera: Scelionidae) as an egg parasitoid of
Nezara viridula (Heteroptera: Pentatomidae) in Central Italy. Environmental Entomology. 24(6): 1703-
Corbet, A.S. and Pendlebury, H.M. (1992). The Butterflies of the Malay Peninsula. 4th edn., Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia: United Selangor Press.
Das, A.K., Nerkar, S. and Kumar, A. (2018). First report of Phyllosticta citricarpa causing citrus black spot on
Citrus sinensis and C. reticulata in India. Plant Disease. 102(8): 1661.
Dias-Pini, N.S., Lima, M.G.A., Lima, E.F.B., Maciel, G.P.S. and Duarte, P.M. (2018). Scirtothrips dorsalis
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae): a newly introduced polyphagous pest in northeastern Brazil. Neotrop. Entom.
47(5): 725-728. DOI:10.1007/s13744-018-0618-3
Diez, P.A., Peña, J.E. and Fidalgo, P. (2006). Population dynamics of Phyllocnistis citrella (Lepidoptera:
Gracillariidae) and its parasitoids in Tafí Viejo, Tucumán, Argentina. Florida Entom. 89(3): 328-335.
DOI:10.1653/0015-4040(2006)89[328:PDOPCL]2.0.CO;2
Duran, E.L., Ploper, L.D., Ramallo, J.C., Grandi, R.A.P., Giancoli, A.C.H. and Azevedo, J.L. (2005). Canadian
Journal of Botany. 83(4): 350-355.
Ebeling, W. (1950). Subtropical entomology. Lithotype Process Co., San Francisco, California. 747 pp.
Ebeling, W. (1959). Subtropical Fruit Pests. University of California, Los Angeles. 436 pp.
EFSA PLH Panel (EFSA Panel on Plant Health). (2018). Scientific Opinion on the pest categorisation of Scirtothrips
aurantii. EFSA Journal 16(3): 5188, 21 pp. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5188
El-Wakil, H.B., Banaja, A.E.A. and Amer, S.A.M. (2011). Morphometric and genetic insights for three terrestrial
snails in Taif province of Saudi Arabia. World Applied Sciences Journal. 14(4): 546-551.
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp. https://gd.eppo.int/
EPPO. (2002). Plant Quarantine Information Retrieval System v 4.1. Paris, France: European and Mediterranean
Plant Protection Organization.
Erdogan, C., Velİoglu, A.S., Gurkan, M.O., Denholm, I. and Moores, G.D. (2012). Chlorpyrifos ethyl-oxon
sensitive and insensitive acetylcholinesterase variants of greenhouse whitefly Trialeurodes vaporariorum
(Westw.) (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae) from Turkey. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology. 104(3): 273-
Escargots Funcia. (2009). Cornu aspersum. In: Escargots Funcia, http://www.escargot.com.br/eng/index.html
Ester, A. and Nijënstein, J.H. (1996). Molluscicidal seed treatment of barley, wheat and perennial ryegrass to control
the field slug (Deroceras reticulatum). Netherlands Journal of Agricultural Science. 44(3): 241-248.
Farr, D.F., Bills, G.F., Chamuris, G.P. and Rossman, A.Y. (1989). Fungi on plants and plant products in the United
States. APS Press, St Paul, USA. p: 1252.
Fawcett, H.S. (1936). Citrus diseases and their control (2nd edition). McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, USA. pp:
440-448.
Fernandez, P.S.C., Aguiar-Menezes, E.L., Lima, A.F., Frade, P.M.R.M., Teixeira, A.J. and Bucher, C.A. (2022).
Aleyrodid (Hemiptera) diversity in hop varieties grown in Brazil. Bioscience Journal. DOI:10.14393/BJ-
v38n0a2022-54011
Ferretti, L., Fontana, A., Sciarroni, R., Schimio, R., Loconsole, G., Albanese, G. and Saponari, M. (2014). Molecular
and biological evidence for a severe seedling yellows strain of Citrus tristeza virus spreading in southern
Italy. Phytopathologia Mediterranea. 53(1): 3-13.
Fletcher, J.T., Smewin, B.J. and Cook, R.T.A. (1988). Plant Pathology. 37(4): 594-598.
Fletcher, R.S., Everitt, J.H., Davis, M.R. and Escobar, D.E. (2004). Integrating airborne imagery and GIS
technology to map and compare citrus blackfly infestations occurring in different years. Hort.Tech. 14(3):
398-401. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTTECH.14.3.0398
Folgarait, P.J., Patrock, R.J.W., Albioni-Montenegro, G., Saldua, L. and Gilbert, L.E. (2008). Solenopsis invicta:
evidence for recent internal immigration across provinces in Argentina. Florida Entomologist. 91(1): 131-
Fujiwara-Tsujii, N., Yasui, H., Wakamura, S., Hashimoto, I. and Minamishima, M. (2012). The white-spotted
longicorn beetle, Anoplophora malasiaca (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae), with a blueberry as host plant,
utilizes host chemicals for male orientation. App. Entom. Zoo. 47(2): 103-110. DOI:10.1007/s13355-012-
0095-9
French, J.M., Beacham, J., Garcia, A., Goldberg, N.P., Thomas, S.H. and Hanson, S.F. (2017). First report of stem
and bulb nematode Ditylenchus dipsaci on garlic in New Mexico. Plant Health Progress. PHP-12-16-
0069-BR. http://www.plantmanagementnetwork.org/php/elements/sum2.aspx?id=10972
Furk, C. (1979). A British record of Aphis citricola van der Goot. Plant Pathology. 28(3): 157.
Gambley, C.F., Thomas, J.E., Persley, D.M. and Hall, B.H. (2010). First report of Tomato torrado virus on tomato
from Australia. Plant Disease. 94(4): 486.
Ganie, S.A., Khan, Z.H. and Padder, S.A. (2013a). Identification and Taxonomical Studies of Fruit Flies on
Cucurbits
in
Kashmir
Valley.
8(1):
263-269.
http://www.thebioscan.in/journal%20supplement/81sup07%20s.%20a.%20ganie.pdf

Gao, J.Y., Jun, G., Wang, Z.R., Zhou, D.G., Peng, M.X. and Yue, J.Q. (2012). Study on insect pest species and
occurrence rule of main species in Dehong lemon orchard of Yunnan province. Acta Agriculturae Jiangxi.
24(6): 70-73. http://www.jxnyxb.com
Garzia, T.G. and Lillo, D.E. (2018). Geographic distribution of Phyllocoptruta oleivora in the Mediterranean Basin,
with particular emphasis on Italy. Syst. App. Acarology. 23: 1021-1023.
Gautam, J. and Acharya, B. (2014). Survey and monitoring of insect pest and disease of ginger in Nepal. Nepalese
Journal of Agricultural Sciences. 118-123.
Ghosh, D.K., Kokane, A., Kokane, S., Tenzin, J., Gubyad, M.G., Wangdi, P., Murkute, A.A., Sharma, A.K. and
Gowda, S. (2020). Detection and molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ and
Citrus tristeza virus associated with citrus decline in Bhutan. Phytopathology (early view).
https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-07-20-0266-R
Gilbert, M.J. (1994). The first record of the spirea aphid, Aphis spiraecola Patch (Homoptera: Aphidoidea), on citrus
in South Africa. Citrus Journal. 4(4): 23.
Glen, D.M., Cuerden, R. and Butler, R.C. (1991). Impact of the field slug Deroceras reticulatum on establishment
of ryegrass and white clover in mixed swards. Annals of Applied Biology. 119(1): 155-162.
Godan, D. (1983). Pest Slugs and Snails. Biology and Control., Berlin; Heidelberg; New York, Springer-Verlag.
Gomes, A.M.S.V., Reis, F.O., Lemos, R.N.S., Mondego, J.M., Braun, H. and Araujo, J.R.G. (2019). Physiological
characteristics of citrus plants infested with citrus blackfly. Revista Brasileira de Entom. 63(2): 119–123.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbe.2019.02.002
González, O., Pérez, C.G., Membiela, M., Frezza, D., Bartoloni, N. and Vieites, C. (2009). Discrete observations
of the spatial distributions of the Helix aspersa snail in an outdoor system. Ciencia e Investigación Agraria.
36(1): 123-130.
Gözel, Ç. and Gözel, U. (2014). The potential use of entomopathogenic nematodes against tomato leaf miner Tuta
absoluta (Lep: Gelechiidae) [Conference poster]. In: Proceedings, 4th ESENIAS Workshop: International
Workshop on IAS in Agricultural and Non-Agricultural Areas in ESENIAS Region, Çanakkale, Turkey,
16-17 December 2013 [Proceedings, 4th ESENIAS Workshop: International Workshop on IAS in
Agricultural and Non-Agricultural Areas in ESENIAS Region, Çanakkale, Turkey, 16-17 December
2013.], [ed. by Uludağ A, Trichkova T, Rat M, Tomov R]. Ankara, Turkey: Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart
University. 116.
Greco, N. (2021). Sustainable management of major nematode parasites of chickpea and broad bean in the
Mediterranean region. In: Integrated nematode management: state-of-the-art and visions for the future.
Sikora, R.A., Desaeger, J. and Molendijk, L. (eds.). Wallingford, UK: CABI. pp: 138-144.
DOI:10.1079/9781789247541.0020
Grimm, F.W., Forsyth, R.G., Schueler, F.W. and Karstad, A. (2009). Identifying land snails and slugs in Canada.,
iv Ottawa, 168 pp.
Haack, R.A., Hérard, F., Sun, J. and Turgeon, J.J. (2010). Managing invasive populations of Asian longhorned
beetle and citrus longhorned beetle: A worldwide perspective. Ann. Rev. Entom. 55: 521–546.
Haq, I., Vreysen, M.J.B., Schutze, M., Hendrichs, J. and Shelly, T. (2016). Effects of methyl eugenol feeding on
mating compatibility of Asian population of Bactrocera dorsalis (Diptera: Tephritidae) with African
population
and
with
B.
carambolae.
J.
Econ.
Entom.
109(1):
148-153.
http://jee.oxfordjournals.org/content/109/1/148
Hérard, F. and Roques, A. (2009). Current status of Anoplophora spp. in Europe and an update on suppression
efforts. In: Proceedings of 20th US Department of Agriculture interagency research forum on invasive
species, 2009 January 13-16, Annapolis, MD. Gen. Tech. Rep., PA: US Department of Agric. p.: 35.
Hoberlandt, L. (1984). Heteroptera of Afghanistan. Acanthosomatidae, Cydnidae, Scutelleridae and Pentatomidae.
Acta Faunistica Entomologica Musei Nationalis Pragae. 17(193): 69-128.
Hodjat, S.H. and Eastop, V.F. (1983). Aphis citricola van der Goot, a new aphid pest of citrus in Iran. Entomologie
et Phytopathologie Appliquées. 50(1/2): 57-66.
Hommay, G. (1995). The slugs injurious to crops. (Les limaces nuisibles aux cultures.). Revue Suisse d'Agriculture.
27(5): 267-286.
Hou, X., Huang, F., Zhang, T., Xu, J., Hyde, D.K. and Li, H. (2014). Pathotypes and Genetic Diversity of Chinese
Collections of Elsinoë fawcettii Causing Citrus Scab. J. Inte. Agri. 13(6): 1293-1302.
Hoy, M.A. (2011). Agricultural Acarology: Introduction to Integrated Mite Management. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida, 430.
Ibrahim, I.K.A. and Handoo, Z.A. (2016). Occurrence of phytoparasitic nematodes on some crop plants in northern
Egypt. Pakistan Journal of Nematology. 34(2): 163-169.
ICAR. (2010). Annual Report 2009-10, ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Meghalaya.
Iglesias, J. and Castillejo, J. (1999). Field observations on feeding of the land snail Helix aspersa Müller. Journal
of Molluscan Studies. 65(4): 411-423.
IPPC. (2010). Red Imported Fire Ant (RIFA) in Queensland, Australia. In: IPPC Official Pest Report, Rome, Italy:
FAO. https://www.ippc.int/

IPPC. (2020). Eradication of Bactrocera dorsalis (Oriental Fruit Fly) in three separate areas in the Eastern Cape
Province of South Africa. In: IPPC Official Pest Report, Rome, Italy: FAO. https://www.ippc.int/
ISSG. (2014). Global Invasive Species Database (GISD). In: Invasive Species Specialist Group of the IUCN
Species Survival Commission, http://www.issg.org/database/welcome/
Jaciani, F.J., Destéfano, S.A.L., Neto, R.J. and Belasque, J.J. (2009). Detection of a new bacterium related to
Xanthomonas fuscans subsp. aurantifolii infecting Swingle citrumelo in Brazil. Plant Dis. 93(10): 1074.
DOI:10.1094/PDIS-93-10-1074B
James, D.G. (1990). Incidence of egg parasitism of Biprorulus bibax Breddin (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae) in
southern New South Wales and northern Victoria. Gen. App. Entom. 22: 55-60.
Jeffress, S., Arun-Chinnappa, K., Stodart, B., Vaghefi, N., Tan, Y.P. and Ash, G. (2020). Genome mining of the
citrus pathogen Elsinoë fawcettii; prediction and prioritisation of candidate effectors, cell wall degrading
enzymes and secondary metabolite gene clusters. PLoS One 15(5):e0227396.
Joshi, S. and Sangma, R.H.C. (2015). Natural enemies associated with aphids and coccids from Sikkim, India.
Journal of Biological Control. 29(1): 3-7.
Katsoyannos, P., Kontodimas, D.C., Stathas, G.J. and Tsartsalis, C.T. (1997). Establishment of Harmonia axyridis
on citrus and some data on its phenology in Greece. Phytoparasitica. 25(3): 183-191.
Kerney, M.P., Cameron, R.A.D. and Jungbluth, J.H. (1979). (Die Landschnecken Nord- und Mitteleuropas).,
Hamburg, Germany: Paul Parey.
Kerney, M.P. (1999). Atlas of the land and freshwater molluscs of Britain and Ireland. Colchester, UK: Harley
Books.
Khalil, S.K., Anwar, M., Naeem, M., Ali, I.I., Shah, F. and Jabbar, A. (1991). Studies on the population dynamics,
host preference and chemical control of brown garden snail Helix aspersa Muller. Sarhad Journal of
Agriculture. 7(2): 83-89.
Khamis, F.M., Masiga, D.K., Mohamed, S.A., Salifu, D., Meyer, M. and Ekesi, S. (2012). Taxonomic Identity of
the Invasive Fruit Fly Pest, Bactrocera invadens: Concordance in Morphometry and DNA Barcoding.
PLoS ONE. 7(9). DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0044862
Khan, A., Khanzada, K.A., Shaukat, S.S. and Shahzad, S. (2007). Nematodes associated with onion in Sindh,
Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of Nematology. 25(2): 291-294.
Kiss, L., Cook, R.T.A., Saenz, G.S., Cunnington, J.H., Takamatsu, S., Pascoe, I., Bardin, M., Nicot, P.C., Sato, Y.;
Rossman, A. Y. (2001). Mycological Research. 105(6): 684-697.
Kozár, F., Guignard, E., Bachmann, F., Mani, E. and Hippe, C. (1994). The scale insect and whitefly species of
Switzerland
(Homoptera:
Coccoidea
and
Aleyrodoidea).
Mitteilungen
der
Schweizerischen
Entomologischen Gesellschaft. 67(1-2): 151-161.
Kumar, P.S. and Rachana, R.R. (2021). Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) is a pest of celery, Apium
graveolens (Apiales: Apiaceae): first report and diagnostic characters. Journal of Integrated Pest
Management. 12 (46), DOI:10.1093/jipm/pmab039
Kusumo, S. (1990). Indonesian Agricultural Research & Development Journal. 12(3): 35-39.
Lama, T.K. and Amatya, P. (1993). Survey of the Incidence of Citrus Greening Disease and its Psylla Vector in
Nepal and Bhutan. J. Inter. Org. Citrus Vir. Con. Proc. (1957-2010). 12(2): 445-446.
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hk8p4cb DOI:10.5070/C56hk8p4cb
Lebeda, A. and Mieslerova, B. (2002). Zeitschrift fur Pflanzenkrankheiten und Pflanzenschutz. 109(2): 129-141.
Leblanc, L., Hossain, M.A., Khan, S.A. and Jose, S.M., Rubinoff, D. (2013). A preliminary survey of the fruit flies
(Diptera: Tephritidae: Dacinae) of Bangladesh. Proc. Hawaiian Entomol.l Soc. 45:51-58.
Leblanc, L., Jose, S.M.M, Barr, N. and Rubinoff, D. (2015). A phylogenetic assessment of the polyphyletic nature
and intraspecific color polymorphism in the Bactrocera dorsalis complex (Diptera, Tephritidae).
ZooKeys.. pp: 339-367.
Lemaire, J.M., Conus, M., Burgerjon, A. and Mas, P. (1999). PHM Revue Horticole No. 402. pp: 21-24.
Leong, S.S., Leong, S.C.T., Abang, F., Beattie, G.A.C. and Kueh, J.H. (2018). Distribution patterns of Diaphorina
citri Kuwayama (Hemiptera: Psyllidae) eggs, nymphs and adults in a Malaysian citrus orchard. Israel J.
Entom. 48(1): 49-62. DOI:10.5281/zenodo.1298369
Li, C.Q. (1985). On vertical distribution of natural enemies in paddy fields. Natural Enemies of Insects. 7(3): 149-
Li, W.B., Song, Q.J., Brlansky, R.H. and Hartung, J.S. (2007). Genetic diversity of citrus bacterial canker pathogens
preserved in herbarium specimens. Proc. Nation. Aca. Sci. U.S.A. 104(47): 18427-18432.
Lima, N.B., Batista, A.M.V., Morais, M.A., Jr., Barbosa, M.A.G., Michereff, S.J., Hyde, K.D. and Câmara, M.P.S.
(2013). Five Colletotrichum species are responsible for mango anthracnose in northeastern Brazil. Fungal
Divers. 61: 75-88.
Lin, H.C., Feng, C.Y., Chang, Y.A. and Chang, H. (2012). Molecular typing and genetic characterization of
pathogenic variants of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri in Taiwan. J. Phytopath. 160(9): 475-483.
Liu, Z.M., Meats, A. and Beattie, G.A.C. (2008). Seasonal dynamics, dispersion, sequential sampling plans and
treatment thresholds for the citrus leafminer, Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton (Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae),

in a mature lemon block in coastal New South Wales, Australia. Aus. J. Entom. 47(3): 243-250.
DOI:10.1111/j.1440-6055.2008.00651.x
Looney, C., Tilbury, M., Carman, B., Murray, T. and Bush, M.R. (2019). An established population of the southern
green stink bug, Nezara viridula (Linnaeus), in Washington state. Proceedings of the Entomological
Society of Washington. 121(4): 735-740.
Loeza-Kuk, E., Ochoa-Martínez, D.L., Mora-Aguilera, G., Rivas-Valencia, P., Gutiérrez-Espinosa, M.A., Cintra,
J.J.W., Villegas-Monter, Á., Arno-Wulff, N. and Perez-Molphe-Balch, E. (2008). Detection of Citrus
sudden death-associated virus and Haplotypes of Citrus tristeza virus in Toxoptera citricida and Aphis
spiraecola and implication on citrus sudden death in Brazil. Agrociencia, 42(6): 669-678.
Lopez, S.N., Peralta, C., Aguirre, A. and Caceres, S. (2011). First record of the citrus blackfly Aleurocanthus
woglumi (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae) in Argentina. [Primer registro de "la mosca negra de los cítricos"
Aleurocanthus woglumi (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae) en la Argentina]. Revista de la Sociedad Entom. Arg.
70: 373-374. http://www.scielo.org.ar/pdf/rsea/v70n3-4/v70n3-4a23.pdf
Lopes, F.S.C., Oliveira, J.V., Oliveira, J.E.M., Oliveira, M.D. and Souza, A.M. (2019). Host plants for mealybugs
(Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae) in grapevine crops. Pesquisa Agropecuária Trop. DOI:10.1590/1983-
40632019v4954421
Lvovsky, and Fallahzadeh. (2010). Psorosticha zizyphi (Lepidoptera: Dressariidae) is newly recorded from Iran.
Far Eastern Entom. (N.216): 14-16.
Maciel. (2015). Status sanitário da mosca negra dos citros no Brasil. Dissertação (Mestrado em Defesa Sanitária
Vegetal) - Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, 88 pp.
Mafi, S.A. and Ohbayashi, N. (2004). Seasonal prevalence of the citrus leafminer, Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton
(Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae) and its parasitoids in controlled and uncontrolled Citrus iyo groves in Ehime
Prefecture, Japan. App. Entom. Zoo. 39(4): 597-601. DOI:10.1303/aez.2004.597
Maheshini, P.W.D.B., Thilakarathne, K.G.D.D., Hirimuthugoda, G.N., Ranawana, K.B. and Kumburegama, S.
2019. The distribution of terrestrial pest gastropods and their damage to agricultural crops in Kandy and
Nuwara Eliya districts in Sri Lanka. Ceylon Journal of Science. 48 (2), 177-184.
Mahmood, K. (2004). Identification of pest species in oriental fruit fly, Bactrocera dorsalis (Hendel) (Diptera:
Tephritidae) species complex. Pak. J. Zoo. 36(3): 219-230.
Malumphy, C., Walsh, K., Suarez, M.B., Collins, D.W. and Boonham, N. (2009). Morphological and molecular
identification of all developmental stages of four whitefly species (Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae) commonly
intercepted in quarantine. Zootaxa. 1-29. DOI:10.5281/zenodo.188030 ; 10.15468/oqy9m1
Malumphy, C. and Badmin, J.S. (2012). Scale insects and whiteflies (Hemiptera: Coccoidea and Aleyrodoidea) of
Watsonian Kent; with a discussion on the impact of naturalised non-native species. Bri. J. Entom. Nat. His.
25: 15-49.
Mangrio, W.M., Sahito, H.A., Bhugro, M., Kousar, T., Shah, Z.H. and Jatoi, F.A. (2020). Incidence and distribution
of lemon Butterfly (Papilio demoleus L.) on five alternate Citrus hosts at Sahati region, Sindh-Pakistan.
Pure App. Bio. 9(4): 2637-2647. DOI:10.19045/bspab.2020.90280
Martinez-Minaya, J., Conesa, D., Lopez-Quilez, A. and Vicent, A. (2015). Climatic distribution of citrus black spot
caused by Phyllosticta citricarpa. A historical analysis of the disease spread in South Africa. European
Journal of Plant Pathology. 143(1): 69-83.
Martini, X., Paret, M., Bodrey, R., Lovestrand, E. and McConnell, J. (2018). Distribution of Asian citrus psyllid in
the
Florida
panhandle.
Proc.
Florida
State
Hortil.
Soc.
pp:
85-87.
https://journals.flvc.org/fshs/article/view/114723/110050
Massonie G, Garnier M, Bove J M, 1976. Transmission of Indian citrus decline by Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio),
the vector of South African greening. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Conference of the International
Organization of Citrus Virologists. [Proceedings of the Seventh Conference of the International
Organization of Citrus Virologists.], [ed. by Calavan E C]. Riverside, USA: Univ. California. 18-20.
Matsumoto, K. (2002). Papilio demoleus (Papilionidae) in Borneo and Bali. J. Lep. Soc. 56(2): 108-111.
McDonnell, R.J., Robinson, D.G., Barr, N., Ley, I.T., Ley, P. and Paine, T.D. (2014). First report of the invasive
slug Boettgerilla pallens Simroth, 1912 (Boettgerillidae) in the United States. American Malacological
Bulletin. 32(2): 209-210.
Mendes, M.A.S., Dianese, J.C. and Urben, A. (2019). Fungos em Plants no Brasil. 2a Edição ampliada e revisada.
– Brasília, DF: Escola Nacional de Gestão Agropecuária, 970 pages.
Méndez-Lozano, J., Magallanes-Tapia, M.A., Romero-Romero, J.L., Camacho-Beltrán, E., Orduño-Vega, W.L.,
Leyva-López, N.E., Santos-Cervantes, M.E. and Félix-Gastélum, R. (2012). Tomato infectious chlorosis
virus associated with tomato diseases in Baja California, Mexico. Plant Disease. 96(8): 1229.
Mirab-Balou, M., Tong, X.L. and Chen, X.X. (2014). Thrips species diversity in urban green spaces of Hangzhou
(Zhejiang Province), China. J. Entomol. Acarol. Res. 46(3): 85-89. DOI:10.4081/jear.2014.1828
Mo, J., Zhao, G., Li, Q., Soalngi, G.S., Tang, L., Huang, S., Guo, T. and Hsiang, T. (2018). Identification and
characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with mango anthracnose in Guangxi, China. Plant
Dis. 102: 1283-1289.

Mound, L.A. and Tree, D.J. (2020). Thysanoptera Australiensis– Thrips of Australia. Lucidcentral.org, Identic Pty
Ltd,
Queensland,
Australia.
https://keys.lucidcentral.org/keys/v3/thrips_australia/keys/Thripinae_Australia/key/austhripinae/Media/H
tml/Entities/scirtothrips_aurantii.htm
Mwaura, P., Niere, B. and Vidal, S. (2015). Resistance and tolerance of potato varieties to potato rot nematode
(Ditylenchus destructor) and stem nematode (Ditylenchus dipsaci). Annals of Applied Biology. 166(2):
257-270. DOI:10.1111/aab.12180
Nada, M.S.E, Ebrahim, A.M.E. and El-Hawagry, M.S.A. (2022). First record of the genus Acletoxenus (Diptera:
Drosophilidae) and its predaceous species A. formosus (Leow, 1864) in Egypt, with some field
observations and biological remarks. Egyptian Journal of Biological Pest Control. 32(68).
DOI:10.1186/s41938-022-00567-x
Nagaoka-Nakazono, E., Uechi, N., Katoh, H., Fujikawa, T., Miyata, S., Furukawa, T., Asakawa, T., Sasaki, M.,
Kuwahara, R., Kim, O.K., Shinohara, H. and Iwanami, T. (2020). Limited occurrence of tristeza in yuzu
and possible tristeza-free cultivation in northernmost commercial yuzu-producing areas of Japan. Japan
Agricultural Research Quarterly. 54(4): 307-316.
Nannini, M., Foddi, F., Murgia, G., Pisci, R., Sanna, F., Testa, M. and Accotto, G.P. (2011). A survey of TYLCD
epidemics in Sardinia (Italy) - estimating the environmental inoculum and correlating it with whitefly
population trends. Acta Horticulturae. pp: 181-184.
Nasruddin, A. and Mound, L.A. (2016). First record of Trialeurodes vaporariorum Westwood (Hemiptera:
Aleyrodidae) severely damaging field grown potato crops in South Sulawesi, Indonesia. Journal of Plant
Protection Research. 56(2): 199-202.,
Nava, D.E., Torres, M.L.G., Rodrigues, M.D.L., Bento, J.M.S. and Parra, J.R.P. (2007). Biology of Diaphorina
citri (Hem., Psyllidae) on different hosts and at different temperatures. J. App. Entom. 131(9/10): 709-715.
DOI:10.1111/j.1439-0418.2007.01230.x
NHM. (1891). Specimen record from the collection in the Natural History Museum (London, UK)., London, UK:
Natural History Museum (London).
NPPO. (2018). Surveys conducted in 2013 in Corse showed that European strains of CTV are established in HauteCorse and can no longer be eradicated. More recent surveys confirmed that the situation is stable and that
only mild strains occur without causing economic impact.
NPPO of the Netherlands. (2013). Pest status of harmful organisms in the Netherlands., Wageningen, Netherlands:
Nugnes, F., Russo, E., Viggiani, G. and Bernardo, U. (2018). First record of an invasive fruit fly belonging to
Bactrocera
dorsalis
complex
(Diptera:
Tephritidae)
in
Europe.
Insects.
9(4):
https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4450/9/4/182
Palomares-Rius, J.E., Cantalapiedra-Navarrete, C., Archidona-Yuste, A. and Castillo, P. (2016). Hoplotylus
feminas’Jacob, 1960 (Nematoda: Pratylenchidae) from Spain with molecular phylogenetic relationships
inferred by D2-D3 expansion fragments of 285 and the partial 185 rRNA sequences. Nematology. 18(5):
559-569.
Paola, R., Mariana, M., Raquel, C. and Mercedes, P. (2013). Characterization of Xanthomonas citri sbsp strains.
citrus, the causative agent of citrus cancer. (Caracterización de cepas de Xanthomonas citri sbsp. citri,
agente causal del cancro cítrico). Agrociencia. 17(2): 64-74.
Patial, A. and Mehta, P.K. (2008). Pest complex of brinjal and their succession under mid hills of Himachal Pradesh.
Journal of Insect Science (Ludhiana). 21(1): 67-71.
Pattarmanon, T. (1987). Life cycle and growth of the escargot (Helix aspersa Müller) reared in Thailand. Journal
of the National Research Council, Thailand. 19(2): 47-71.
Paul, I., van Jaarsveld, A.S., Korsten, L. and Hattingh, V. (2005). The potential global geographical distribution of
Citrus Black Spot caused by Guignardia citricarpa (Kiely): likelihood of disease establishment in the
European Union. Crop Protection. 24(2): 297-308.
Pesquero, M.A. and Penteado-Dias, A.M. (2004). New records of Orasema xanthopus (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae)
and Solenopsis daguerrei (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) from Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Biology. 64 (3b):
Porta, N.C. (1992). Population dynamics of Trissolcus basalis (Wollaston) 1858 (Hymenoptera: Scelionidae). I.
Life statistics. (Dinámica poblacional de Trissolcus basalis (Wollaston) 1858 (Hymenoptera: Scelionidae).
I. Estadisticos vitales.). Revista de la Sociedad Entomológica Argentina. 50(1-4): 267-275.
Portillo, M.M. (1988). Bioecological inventory of aphids on citrus plants and population densities of the principal
species. (Inventario bioecologico de los afidos que viven en plantas citricas, y curvas poblacionales de las
principales especies.). Revista de la Sociedad Entomológica Argentina. 47(1-4): 79-93.
Price, W.C. (1971). United Nations Development, Programme, FAO No. TA 3037, 30 pp.
Prins, D.J. and Prins, D.W. (2014). Afromoths, online database of Afrotropical moth species (Lepidoptera). World
Wide Web electronic publication (www.afromoths.net) (12 Aug.2014).
Quimio, G.M. and Calilung, V.J. (1993). Survey of flying viruliferous aphid species and population build-up of
Aphis glycines Matsumura in soybean fields. Philippine Entomologist. 9(1): 52-100.

Rahman, S.A.S.A., Zain, S.N.M., Mat, M.Z.B., Sidam, A.K., Othman, R.Y. and Mohamed, Z. (2014). Population
distribution of plant-parasitic nematodes of bananas in Peninsular Malaysia. Sains Malaysiana. 43(2): 175-
http://www.ukm.my/jsm/pdf_files/SM-PDF-43-2-
2014/03%20S.A.%20Sayed%20Abdul%20Rahman.pdf
Rajendram, G.F. and Devarajah, F.R. (1990). Survey of some rice insect pests and their predators in three districts
of Sri Lanka. Journal of the National Science Council of Sri Lanka. 18(1): 79-92.
Read, D.A. and Pietersen, G. (2017). Diversity of Citrus tristeza virus populations in commercial grapefruit orchards
in Southern Africa, determined using Illumina Mi Seq technology. European Journal of Plant Pathology.
148(2): 379-391.
Read, D.A., Palacios, M.F., Kleynhans, J., Figueroa, J., Foguet, L., Stein, B. and Pietersen. (2018). Survey of Citrus
tristeza virus (CTV) diversity in pigmented in Citrus x paradisi (Macfad.) Burm f. (grapefruit) trees in
north-western Argentina. European Journal of Plant Pathology. 151(2), 329-340.
Reuther, W., Calavan, E.C. and Carman, G.E. (1978). The citrus industry, Vol. IV. University of Callifornia, Davis,
USA.
Riaz, M.F., Raza, A.B.M., Majeed, M.Z. and Talha, N. (2022). Diversity and species distribution of aphids
(Hemiptera: Aphididae) in district Sargodha (Punjab, Pakistan). Sarhad Journal of Agriculture. 38(2): 540-
547. DOI:10.17582/journal.sja/2022/38.2.540.547
Ricalde, M.P., Nava, D.E., Loeck, A.E., Coutinho, E.F., Bisognin, A. and Garcia, F.R.M. (2015). Insects related to
olive culture in Rio Grande do Sul State, Brazil. Ciência Rural. 45(12): 2125-2130.
Rizk, G.A., Moftah, E.A., Karaman, G.A. and Abdel-Naby, A.A. (1990). Effectiveness of different planting dates
on the population density of some sucking pests attacking soyabean plants in Minia Region. Assiut Journal
of Agricultural Sciences. 21(3): 141-151.
Safdar, A., Javed, N., Khan, S.A., Khan, H.U., Rehman, A. and Haq, I. (2010). Survey and investigation of different
citrus growing areas for citrus sudden death syndrome. Pakistan Journal of Phytopathology. 22(2): 71-78.
Salas-Araiza, M. D., Mackay, W.P. and Salazar-Solís, E. (2012). First report of the red imported fire ant Solenopsis
invicta Buren (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) from Central México. Entomological News. 122(1): 93-94.
Savitha, A.S., Ajithkumar, K., Palaiah, P. and Ramesh, G. (2016). Integrated management of citrus canker caused
by Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse) in acid lime (Citrus auruntifolia). Pest Manag. Hortil. Ecos.
22(2): 189-192.
Seebens, H., Blackburn, T.M., Dyer, E.E., Genovesi, P., Hulme, P.E., Jeschke, J.M., Pagad, S., Pyšek, P., Winter,
M., Arianoutsou, M., Bacher, S., Blasius, B., Brundu, G., Capinha, C., Celesti-Grapow, L., Dawson, W.,
Dullinger, S., Fuentes, N., Jäger, H., Kartesz, J., Kenis, M., Kreft, H., Kühn, I., Lenzner, B., Liebhold, A.
and Mosena, A. (2017). No saturation in the accumulation of alien species worldwide. Nat. Comm. 8(2):
14435. http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms14435
Sharma, G., Kumar, N., Weir, B.S., Hyde, K.D. and Shenoy, B.D. (2013). The ApMat marker can resolve
Colletotrichum species: A case study with Mangifera indica. Fungal Divers. 61: 117-138.
Shivas, R.G., Tan, Y.P., Edwards, J., Dinh, Q., Maxwell, A., Andjic, V., Liberato, J.R., Anderson, C., Beasley,
D.R., Bransgrove, K., Coates, L.M., Cowan, K., Daniel, R., Dean, J.R., Lomavatu, M.F., Mercado-Escueta,
D., Mitchell, R.W., Thangavel, R., Tran-Nguyen, L.T.T. and Weir, B.S. (2016). Colletotrichum species in
Australia. Aus. Plant Pathol. 45: 447-464.
Singh, S., Mulani, E., Bhattacharyya, U., Palchoudhury, S., Mazumder, N., Saikia, S., Nath, P.D., Pun, K.B. and
Biswas, K.K. (2022). Decline inducing Citrus tristeza virus-VT/Kpg3 genotype occurs predominantly in
citrus orchards of Northeast India. I Indian Phytopathology. 75: 853–861.
Singh, S., Reddy, P.V.R. and Deka, S. (2020). Sucking Pests of Citrus. In: Omkar (ed.) Sucking Pests of Crops
Springer, 515 pp.
Sirisena, U.G.A.I., Watson, G.W., Hemachandra, K.S. and Wijayagunasekara, H.N.P. (2013). Mealybugs
(Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae) species on economically important fruit crops in Sri Lanka. Trop. Agril. Res.
25(1):
69-82.
http://www.pgia.ac.lk/sites/default/files/congress/journel/v25/JournalNo%201/Papers/7%20U.G.A.I.%20Sirisena_final_final_edited.pdf
Smith, C. (1990). Beautiful butterflies: a colourful introduction to Nepal's most beautiful insects., Bangkok,
Thailand: Craftsman Press.
Sposito, M.B., Amorim, L., Bassanezi, R.B., Yamamoto, P.T., Felippe, M.R. and Czermainski, A.B.C. (2011). Crop
Protection. 30(12): 1546-1552.
Srinivasnaik, S., Suganthy, M., Kumar, S.M. and Jegadeeswari, V. (2016). Survey, documentation and identification
of entomofauna of cocoa, Theobroma cacao L. in major cocoa growing regions of South India. J. App.
Nat. Sci. 8(3): 1444-1451. http://jans.ansfoundation.org/previous-issues/volume-8-year-2016--issue-
3#TOC-Physiological-and-biochemical-response-to-higher-temperature-stress-in-hot-pepper-Capsicumannuum-L.-
Srivastava, R.C. (1982). Ind. J. Mycology Plant Path. 12(2): 244-246.
Stocks, S. (2012). Citrus black spot detected in Polk county, Florida. NPDP First Detector Network News. 7(10).
p: 4.

Stravato, V.M. (1993). Informatore Agrario. 49(47): 36-37.
Straw, N.A., Fielding, N.J., Tilbury, C., Williams, D.T. and Inward, D. (2015). Host plant selection and resource
utilisation by Asian longhorn beetle Anoplophora glabripennis (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) in southern
England. Forestry Inter. J. For. Res. 88: 84–95.
Subbotin, S.A., Madani, M., Krall, E., Sturhan, D. and Moens, M. (2005). Molecular diagnostics, taxonomy, and
phylogeny of the stem nematode Ditylenchus dipsaci species complex based on the sequences of the
internal transcribed spacer-rDNA. Phytopathology. 95(11): 1308-1315. DOI:10.1094/PHYTO-95-1308
Sundararaju, P. (2006). Community structure of plant parasitic nematodes in banana plantations of Andhra Pradesh,
India. Indian Journal of Nematology. 36(2): 226-229.
Swirski, E., Izhar, Y. and Wysoki, M. (1991). Appearance of Aphis gossypii Glover and Aphis spiraecola Patch
(Rhynchota: Aphidoidea) on avocado, persimmon and macadamia. Alon Hanotea. 45(5): 416.
Szita, É., Fetykó, K.G., Benedicty, Z.K., Kozár, F., Partsinevelos, G., Milonas. P. and Kaydan, M.B. (2017). Data
on the scale insect (Hemiptera: Coccomorpha) fauna of Greece, with description of two new species.
Zootaxa.
4329(5):
463-476.
http://www.mapress.com/j/zt/article/view/zootaxa.4329.5.4
DOI:10.11646/zootaxa.4329.5.4
Talbot, G. (1939). The Fauna of British India, including Ceylon and Burma. Butterflies, Vol. 1. [ed. by Sewell R B
S]. London, UK: Taylor & Francis. xxix + 600 pp.
Taylor, J.W. (1914). Monograph of the Land and Freshwater Mollusca of the British Isles, Zonitidae, Endodontidae,
Helicidae. Leeds, UK: Taylor Brothers.
Tayyib, M., Suhail, A., Arif, M.J. and Khan, M.A. (2014). Whiteflies (Aleyrodidae: Homoptera) of Punjab Pakistan.
Pak. Entom. 36(1): 31-34.
Thakre, B. and Soni, U. (2017). Incidence of suitable insecticides for the control of leaf miner (Phyllcnistis citrella)
on Nagpur mandarin at Chhindwara district of Madhya Pradesh, India. Ann. Plant Sci. 6(7): 1653-1655.
DOI:10.21746/aps.2017.07.002
Toda, S., Hirose, T., Kakiuchi, K., Kodama, H., Kijima, K. and Mochizuki, M. (2014). Occurrence of a novel strain
of Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in Japan and development of its molecular diagnostics.
App. Entom. Zoo. 49(2): 231-239. DOI:10.1007/s13355-013-0241-z
Tong, X. (1993). Butterfly fauna of Zhejiang., Hangzhou, China: Zhejiang Science and Technology Publishers.
Uddin, M.S., Rahman, M.M., Alam, M.Z., Awal, A. and Mazed, M.A. (2013). Insect pests of yard long bean (Vigna
unguiculata subsp. sesquipedalis L.) in major growing areas of Bangladesh. The Agriculturists. 11(2): 66-
UK, CAB International. (1970). Nezara viridula. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK: CAB International. Map 27 (Revised). DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20056600027
UK, CAB International, 1969. Aphis spiraecola. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK: CAB International. Map 256. DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20056600256
UK, CAB International, 1969. Coccus hesperidum. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK: CAB International. Map 256. DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20056600256
Ullah, F., Gul, R. and Badshah, H. (2005). Efficacy of Five Different Insecticides Against Citrus Leaf Miner
Phyllocnistis
citrella
Stainton
(Lepidoptera;
Gracillariidae).
J.
Entom.
2(1):
25-28.
DOI:10.3923/je.2005.25.28
USDA. (1982). Pests not known to occur in the United States or of limited distribution. No. 28. Citrus black spot,
Guignardia citricarpa. USDA APHIS-PPQ, Beltsville, USA.
Van Nieuwenhove, G.A., Oviedo, A.V.F., Dalto, Y.M., Perez, J., Horak, C.I., Gastaminza, G.A., Willink, E. and
Hallman, G.J. (2016). Gamma radiation phytosanitary treatment against Trialeurodes vaporariorum
(Hemiptera: Aleyrodidae). Florida Entomologist. 99(2): 130-133.
Vernière, C., Vital, K., Boyer, C., Pruvost, O. and Carter, B.A. (2013). First report of sequence type 1, pathotype A
Xanthomonas citri pv. citri from lime and lemon fruit originating from Bangladesh. Plant Dis. 97(6): 836.
Vidya, M., Rajanna, K.M., Reddy, M.N.N. and Babu, V. (2015). Insect pest complex of cashew and influence of
biotic and abiotic factors on the incidence of cashew pests in maidan parts of Karnataka. Acta
Horticulturae. 409-414.
Villiers, E.A. and Milne, D.L. (1975) Citrus and Sub-Tropical Fruit Journal No. 503, 5-8.
Vokou, D., Tziolas, M. and Bailey, S.E.R. (1998). Essential-oil-mediated interactions between oregano plants and
Helicidae grazers. Journal of Chemical Ecology. 24(7): 1187-1202.
Wang, K.H. and Hooks, C.R.R. (2009). Plant-parasitic nematodes and their associated natural enemies within
banana
(Musa
spp.)
plantings
in
Hawaii.
Nematropica.
39(1):
57-73.
http://fulltext10.fcla.edu/DLData/SN/SN00995444/0039_001/57-74.pdf
Waterhouse, D.F. (1993). The major arthropod pests and weeds of agriculture in Southeast Asia. Canberra,
Australia: ACIAR. v + 141 pp.
Weht, S., Brandán, E.Z. and Ploper, J. (1997). Fitopatología. 32(1): 81-84.
Weir, B.S., Johnston, P.R. and Damm, U. (2012). The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex. Stud.
Mycol. 73: 115-180.

Whiteside, J.O. (1980). Proceedings of the International Society of Citriculture 1978, pp. 200-204. Griffith, NSW,
Australia.
Wijs. J.J. (1974). The correlation between the transmission of passionfruit ringspot virus and populations of flying
aphids. Netherlands Journal of Plant Pathology. 80(4): 133-144.
Wikipedia. (2021). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aonidiella_citrina#cite_note-ScaleNet-1
Wikipedia. (2021). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psorosticha_zizyphi
Wikipedia. (2023). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Rhizoctonia_solani
Williams, K., Ali, A. and Zandy, C. (2021). Evaluation of funnel cone traps with different baits for capturing
nuisance arthropods in college station, Texas. INSTARS: A Journal of Undergraduate Research. 6 (1),
https://journals.tdl.org/instars/index.php/instars/article/view/367
Xu, F., Yang, G.Q., Wang, J.M., Song, Y.L., Liu, L.L. and Zhang, J.J. (2016). Composition and variation in
aggressiveness of Fusarium populations causing wheat head blight in Henan Province. Acta Phytopathol.
Sin. 46: 294-303.
Yang, W., FengMao, C., LiChao, W. and Min, L. (2021). Investigation of beetle species that carry the pine wood
nematode, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner and Buhrer) Nickle, in China. J. Forestry Res. 32(4): 1745-
1751. DOI:10.1007/s11676-020-01146-2
Ye, G., Hong, N., Zou, L.F., Zou, H.S., Zakria, M., Wang, G.P. and Chen, G.Y. (2013). Based genetic diversity of
Chinese isolates of the citrus canker pathogen Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri. Plant Dis. pp: 1187-1194.
Yıldırım, M.Z. and Kebapçı, Ü. (2004). Slugs (Gastropoda: Pulmonata) of the Lakes Region (Göller Bölgesi) in
Turkey. Turkish Journal of Zoology. 28(2): 155-160.
Yıldırım, M.Z., Kebapçı, Ü. and Gümüș, B.A. (2004). Edible snails (terrestrial) of Turkey. Turkish Journal of
Zoology. 28(4): 329-335.
Yıldız, Y. (2017). Anoplophora chinensis (Forster, 1771) (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) reported at new location in
Turkey. App. Ecol. Environ. Res. 15(4): 111-116. DOI:10.15666/aeer/1504_111116
Young, C. (1996). Metal chelates as stomach poison molluscicides for introduced pests, Helix aspera, Theba pisana,
Cernuella virgata and Deroceras reticulatum in Australia. In: Slug & snail pests in agriculture.
Proceedings of a Symposium, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK, 24-26 September 1996. [Slug & snail
pests in agriculture. Proceedings of a Symposium, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK, 24-26 September
1996.], Farnham, UK: British Crop Protection Council. 237-243.
Yukawa, J., Kiritani, K., Gyoutoku, N., Uechi, N., Yamaguchi, D. and Kamitani, S. (2007). Distribution range shift
of two allied species, Nezara viridula and N. antennata (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae), in Japan, possibly due
to global warming. Applied Entomology and Zoology. 42(2): 205-215.
Zeng, Y., Ye, W., Tredway, L., Martin, S. and Martin, M. (2012). Taxonomy and morphology of plant-parasitic
nematodes associated with turfgrasses in North and South Carolina, USA. Zootaxa. 3452: 1-46, DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.210165
Zhang, B.C. and Huang, Y.C. (1990). A list of important plant diseases in China. Rev. Plant Path. 69(3): 97-118.
Zhang, Y.M., Li, D.X., Chen, G.Q. and Zhang, G.H. (1997). Studies on the population dynamics of spirea aphid in
apple orchards. Acta Agriculturae Universitatis Henanensis. 31(2): 197-200.
Zidan, Z.H., El-Deeb, H.I., Wilson, M. and Asran, F.D.A. (1997). Molluscicidal activity of certain weed extracts
and fertilizers against the brown garden snail, Helix aspersa. Annals of Agricultural Science (Cairo). 42(2):
687-695.

7.3 Risk assessment
The pest risk assessment of quarantine pests and regulated non-quarantine pest was divided into
three interrelated steps: 1) pest categorization; 2) assessment of the probability of introduction
and spread; and 3) assessment of potential economic consequences (including environmental
impacts). The risk assessment of quarantine pests and regulated non-quarantine pests of citrus
was done in accordance with International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and the
International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM 2, ISPM 11 and ISPM No. 21). The
risk analysis of quarantine pests of citrus identified for Bangladesh has been analyzed details as
follows:

7.3.A. Arthropod: Insect and mites pests

7.3.A.1.
Citrus longhorn beetle, Anoplophora chinensis

7.3.A.1.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus longhorn beetle
Scientific name: Anoplophora chinensis
Synonyms: Anoplophora chinensis Breuning 1944
Anoplophora macularia (Breuning)
Anoplophora malasiaca (Thomson)
Anoplophora malasiaca malasiaca Samuelson 1965
Anoplophora perroudi Pic 1953
Anoplophora sepulchralis Breuning 1944
Callophora afflicta Thomson 1865
Callophora luctuosa Thomson 1865
Cerambyx chinensis Forster 1771
Lamia punctator Fabricius 1777
Melanauster chinensis (Forster)
Melanauster chinensis Matsumura 1908
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta
Order: Coleoptera
Family: Cerambycidae
Genus: Anoplophora
Species: Anoplophora chinensis

EPPO Code: ANOLCN. This pest has been included in EPPO A2 list: No. 187
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]

7.3.A.1.2. Biology
The life cycle of Anoplophora chinensis typically lasts one year, although on rare occasions it
might last two years (Haack et al., 2010). From May to October, adults can be seen, with their
peak emergence often occurring between May and July. However, adults can be watched until
December if the environmental conditions are ideal. Before locating a mate and copulating,
newly emerging adults spend 10 to 15 days eating on leaves, twigs, petioles, and bark (Maspero
et al., 2007; Haack et al., 2010; EPPO, 2013; Wang, 2017).
Following copulation, the females lay their eggs one at a time along the root collar, on exposed
roots, and beneath the lower trunk's bark. They produce "T-shaped" incisions on the bark of the
host plant during oviposition with their mandibles in order to introduce the ovipositor and lay

the eggs. The average female lays 70 eggs during her lifetime (Haack et al., 2010; Wang, 2017).
Long feeding tunnels are dug by larvae in exposed roots and trunks, initially in the cambial
region, and later in the heartwood and sapwood of the lowest parts of the woody tissues (Haack
et al., 2010). Depending on the egg-laying cycle, the majority of A. chinensis individuals
overwinter as larvae at varying stages of development. The mature wintering larvae typically
pupate in the spring (Maspero et al., 2007; Haack et al., 2010).
7.3.A.1.3. Hosts
A. chinensis is a polyphagous xylophile, which means that it attacks a variety of living tree
species. Attacks can occur on more than 100 species in at least 30 families (Kojima and
Nakamura, 1986; Lingafelter and Hoebeke, 2002; Haack et al., 2010; EPPO 2020), particularly
in orchards where it is regarded as a serious pest of citrus (Kojima and Nakamura, 1986;
Lingafelter and Hoebeke, 2002; Haack et al., 2010; EPPO 2020 (Yamaguchi and Ohtake, 1986;
Mitomi et al., 1990). Malus, Pyrus, Alnus, and Platanus also sustain significant harm (Research
Group of Alder-tree-pests, 1972; Aono and Murakoshi, 1980; Ito et al., 1980; Yamaguchi and
Ohtake, 1986; Ohga et al., 1995). Additionally, hosts are found in the genera Pinus and
Cryptomeria's conifer species (Lingafelter and Hoebeke, 2002). The main hosts of interest are
fruit trees: Citrus, Citrus aurantiifolia (lime), Citrus aurantium (sour orange), Citrus deliciosa
(mediterranean mandarin), Citrus limonia (mandarin lime), Citrus maxima (pummelo), Citrus
medica (Zara/Colombo), Citrus natsudaidai (natsudaidai), Citrus nobilis (tangor), Citrus
reticulata (mandarin), Citrus sinensis (sweet orange), Citrus unshiu (satsuma), Malus domestica
(apple).

7.3.A.1.4. Distribution

Asia is the native home of Anoplophora chinensis. This species has been reported in Vietnam,
Taiwan, the Philippines, Myanmar, Malaysia, and Indonesia in addition to China, Japan, and the
Korean peninsula, where it is most common (Lingafelter & Hoebeke, 2002). A. chinensis was
discovered in the USA in 1999 and 2001, and it was deemed extinct in 2005. A. chinensis was
previously only known to exist in Hawaii in the USA (Gyeltshen & Hodges, 2005). This species
was initially identified in the EPPO region in the Netherlands in 1980 (Haack et al., 2010), and
from 2000 to the present, there have been a number of outbreaks. A. chinensis was discovered in
Italy for the first time in the Lombardy Region in 2000. It was later discovered in the Lazio
Region (2008) and the Tuscany Region (2014 and 2017). A. chinensis has been eradicated from
some outbreaks while containment measures are in place in others (EPPO, 2019). A. chinensis
has been recorded and then eliminated in the Netherlands (2003, 2010, 2017, and 2019),
Germany (2008, 2017), Denmark (2011, 2015), and Switzerland (2014, 2019). (EFSA, 2019;
EPPO, 2020a). Additionally, where eradication measures are in place, this beetle has been
observed in France (2003 and 2008), Croatia (2007), and Turkey (2015). (EPPO, 2020a).

EPPO Region: Croatia, France (mainland), Italy (mainland), Türkiye
Asia: China (APPPC 1987), Indonesia (CABI and EPPO 2008), Japan (Gressitt 1951), Malaysia
(Lingafelter and Hoebeke 2002), Myanmar (Gressitt 1951), North Korea (Lee 1982), Philippines
(CABI and EPPO 2008), South Korea (Gressitt 1951), Taiwan (Gressitt 1951) and Turkey (IPPC

7.3.A.1.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that A. chinensis -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]
• Eastern Asia is the natural habitat of the black and white citrus longhorn beetle. It is a
polyphagous species that consumes both broad-leaved and coniferous plants from at least 30

different plant groups. Citrus trees, apple, pear, and other fruit and nut trees, as well as
forestry plantations and woody ornamentals, are all significantly harmed. Females harm the
surface of the trunk and exposed roots as they cut slits for oviposition, while adults nibble on
the sensitive bark of new twigs. The main harm is done by larvae tunneling in the lower stem
and roots of hosts. Growing plants for international trade, particularly plants that have been
intentionally shrunk, can spread A. chinensis (bonsai and penjing). A. chinensis is currently
established in Italy, where measures are being taken to prevent future spread.
• A. chinensis is highly polyphagous. The availability of host plants is not a limiting factor for
its establishment and spread in the EPPO countries as well as climatic conditions, except in
the most northern areas. The findings and outbreaks that have occurred in Europe from 2000
to date demonstrate the beetle’s adaptation to different climates and environments; due to
this, the risk of establishment, spread and damage is considered very high (Van Der Gaag et
al., 2008).
• Detection of A. chinensis infestations is very problematic because often the infested plants
are without signs and infestations may remain undetected for many years and allow the
growth of a large population. In this case, eradication and control activities become long and
costly.
• It is a serious pest of China from where a large number of citrus fruits are imported to
Bangladesh.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the citrus and apple. It has capability to
cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to many valuable fruits.
• A. chinensis is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.1.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.1.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• This species occurs primarily in China, Japan and the Korean peninsula and
it is also reported in Vietnam, Taiwan, the Philippines, Myanmar, Malaysia
and Indonesia (Gressitt, 1951; Lingafelter & Hoebeke, 2002). In 1999 and
2001, it was found in the USA and was considered eradicated in 2005. In
the EPPO region, this species was first reported in 1980 in the Netherlands
(Haack et al., 2010) and several outbreaks occurred from 2000 to the present
day.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• Adults live for about 30 days in China and can be found from April to
August, but are most abundant from May to July. In Japan adults live about
70 days between June and August. Adults are not active at temperatures
below approximately 10°C (Adachi, 1994) and when active during the
daytime they feed on leaves, petioles and the young bark of host trees. This
period of time taken for shipment through transportation pathways from the
above-mentioned exporting countries to Bangladesh is sufficient enough

Yes
and
Moderate

for survival of this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in wrapping (wooden
boxes) and stored in normal conditions. So, the pests could survive during
transporting process.
• A. chinensis larvae bore into the wood of trees where they feed and develop,
a behavior that can provide protection during transport if infested wood is
moved. Eggs are laid in tree bark and can be overlooked during inspections,
potentially surviving transport if proper phytosanitary measures are not in
place.
• Besides, the beetle spends most of its life cycle inside the tree, which
provides a protective environment that could allow it to survive transport in
infested wood.
• While the beetle prefers warmer climates, it can survive in a variety of
temperatures and humidity levels, increasing its chances of surviving
transport.
• Adult beetles can live up to a year, which enhances their chances of survival
during transport.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - No,
• A. chinensis can move via international trade. It is most likely to be moved
as eggs, larvae or pupae in woody growing plants for planting or finished
miniature plants (bonsai or penjing). Individuals (larvae and adults) have
entered Europe and the USA on bonsai plants of Acer buergeranum, A.
palmatum, Celastrus, Cydonia sinensis, Malus micromalus and Sageretia
from China and Japan (Anon., 1986, 1988; EPPO, 2001, 2002a). But it is
not transmitted with citrus fruits. From china, we only imported citrus fruit.
So, there is no risk for this pest to enter into Bangladesh and establish.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• A. chinensis is a polyphagous xylophile, which means that it attacks a
variety of living tree species. Attacks can occur on more than 100 species
in at least 30 families. The main hosts of interest are fruit trees: Citrus,
Citrus aurantiifolia (lime), Citrus aurantium (sour orange), Citrus
deliciosa (mediterranean mandarin), Citrus limonia (mandarin lime),
Citrus maxima (pummelo), Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo), Citrus
reticulata (mandarin) and Citrus sinensis (sweet orange).
• Anoplophora chinensis, or the citrus long-horned beetle, has a broad
tolerance for climatic conditions, but it typically thrives in areas with hot,
humid summers and cold winters, which are typical in many parts of East
Asia. The beetle's optimal growth occurs between 20°C and 30°C, and it
tends to favor humid environments (EPPO 2021).
• Bangladesh has a tropical monsoon climate characterized by high
temperatures, high humidity, and relatively high rainfall, particularly
during the monsoon season. Average temperatures in Bangladesh range
from about 11°C in January to over 30°C in April and May. It is generally
very humid in Bangladesh, with relative humidity ranging from about 80%
in the dry season to nearly 100% during the monsoon season.

• Given these conditions, it seems possible that A. chinensis could survive in
Bangladesh if it were introduced there. The temperatures and humidity
levels in Bangladesh are within the range that A. chinensis can tolerate, and
the beetle would likely be able to find suitable host trees in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appears good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.1.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.1.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• A. chinensis is a polyphagous xylophile, which means that it attacks a variety
of living tree species. Attacks can occur on more than 100 species in at least
30 families. The main hosts of interest are fruit trees: Citrus, Citrus
aurantiifolia (lime), Citrus aurantium (sour orange), Citrus deliciosa
(mediterranean mandarin), Citrus limonia (mandarin lime), Citrus maxima
(pummelo), Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo), Citrus reticulata (mandarin)
and Citrus sinensis (sweet orange). Therefore, it is a high risk, if plant and
plant material are imported from China there is possibility to establish the
pest in Bangladesh.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• The most important damage is caused by larvae. These bore into the wood of
living trees reducing the quality and value of the wood and causing the death
of trees (Eschen et al., 2015).
• As previously reported, in Asia A. chinensis is considered a serious pest of
citrus orchards where it causes important economic losses (Gressitt, 1942;
Lieu, 1945; Mitomi et al., 1990; Smith et al., 1997). Because of this, citrus
plantations near import locations are risk areas that should be considered for
surveillance and monitoring, particularly in regions where citrus cultivation
is of economic relevance (EFSA, 2019).
• In Asia, A. chinensis is also an important pest of many stone and pome fruit,
and mulberry trees (Li et al.,1997). Due to its wide host range, A.
chinensis could have extremely high economic impacts in countries where it
is introduced.
• In North America and Europe, A. chinensis has been found mostly in urban
areas. Often the destruction of infested plants is required to prevent its
spread. In the case of private gardens this may involve not only economic
costs, but also have a social impact on local inhabitants.

Yes
and
High

c. Environmental Impact
• The most direct environmental impact of A. chinensis is the damage it causes
to trees. Both the larvae and the adult beetles bore into the wood of trees,
which can severely weaken the trees and eventually cause them to die. This
can impact the structure and health of forests, orchards, and other wooded
ecosystems (Haack et al.,2010).
• While it's not a primary concern with A. chinensis, it's worth noting that
invasive pests can sometimes facilitate the spread of diseases among trees,
which can further amplify their environmental impact.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.1.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.1.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.1.9. Risk Management Measures

• Since movement of live plants are the main pathway of movement of A. chinensis, it is
important that the host plants are only imported from pest-free areas. Alternatively, the
plants should be grown under carefully supervised conditions in registered nurseries.
Suitable precautions would be to grow the plants for at least two years before dispatch in
an insect-proof enclosure, inspecting them several times a year for the presence of A.
chinensis.
• As a general approach, it has also been recommended that when importing plants for
planting (except seeds) and wood commodities of Castanea, Quercus, Betula, Populus,
Salix, Fagus, Ulmus and Juglans from countries where A. chinensis occurs, precautions
should have been taken to avoid any infestations while the consignments are transported
through possibly infested areas (EPPO, 2017a,b,c,d,2018, 2020a,b).
7.3.A.1.10. References

APPPC, 1987. Insect pests of economic significance affecting major crops of the countries in Asia and
the Pacific region. Technical Document No. 135., Bangkok, Thailand: Regional Office for Asia
and the Pacific region (RAPA).
CABI, EPPO, 2008. Anoplophora chinensis. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK: CABI. Map 595. DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20083279223
EPPO Global Database. (n.d.). Anoplophora chinensis (ANOLCN) - Citrus longhorn beetle. Retrieved
September 2021, from https://gd.eppo.int/taxon/ANOLCN/distribution.
EPPO, 2020. EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database. Paris, France: EPPO.
Gressitt J L, 1951. Longicorn beetles of China. Longicornia. 1-667.
Haack R A, Hérard F, Sun J, & Turgeon JJ (2010) Managing invasive populations of Asian longhorned
beetle and citrus longhorned beetle: a worldwide perspective. Annual review of entomology, 55,
521-546.
Haack, R. A., Hérard, F., Sun, J. H., Turgeon, J. J., 2010. Managing invasive populations of Asian
longhorned beetle and citrus longhorned beetle: a worldwide perspective.Annual Review of
Entomology, 55521-546.
Ito Y, Kitamura T, Hagiwara Y, 1980. The seasonal occurrence and control of white spotted longicorn of
apple trees in Nagano district. Annual Report of The Kanto-Tosan Plant Protection Society,
27:28-34.
Kojima K, Nakamura S, 1986. Food plants of cerambycid beetles (Cerambycidae, Coleoptera) in Japan.
Shobara, Japan: Hiba Society of Natural History. 128-133.
Lingafelter S W, Hoebeke E R, 2001. Variation and homology in elytral maculation in the Anoplophora
malasiaca/macularia species complex (Coleoptera : Cerambycidae) of Japan and Taiwan.
Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Washington. 103 (3), 757-769.
Lingafelter SW, Hoebeke ER, 2002. Revision of the genus Anoplophora (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae).
Revision of the genus italic~Anoplophora^roman (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae), 236 pp.; many
ref.
Maspero M, Cavalieri G, D’Angelo G, Jucker C, Valentini M, Colombo M, Herard F, Lopez J,
Ramualde,N, Ciampitti M, Caremi G & Cavagna B (2007) Anoplophora chinensis - Eradication
programme in Lombardia (Italy).
Research Group of Alder-tree-pests, 1972. Insect pests in the stands of the alder tree, Alnus Inokumai
Murai et Kusaka. Bulletin of the Government Forest Experiment Station, 248:69-87.
Van Der Gaag DJ, Ciampitti M, Cavagna B, Maspero M & Herard F (2008) Pest Risk Analysis for
Anoplophora
chinensis.
Plant
Protection
Service.,
Wageningen,
the
Netherlands.
https://edepot.wur.nl/117610 [accessed on 26 June 2020].
Wang Q (Ed.) (2017) Cerambycidae of the world: Biology and Pest Management. CRC press.

7.3.A.2.
Citrus weevil, Diaprepes abbreviates

7.3.A.2.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus weevil
Scientific name: Diaprepes abbreviates
Synonyms: Diaprepes spengleri (Linnaeus)
Exophthalmus abbreviates (Linnaeus)
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Hexapoda
Class: Insecta
Family: Curculionidae

Genus: Diaprepes
Species: Diaprepes abbreviatus

EPPO Code: DPREAB. It is listed as A1 pest at Chile, Jordan, Turkey, APPPC and PPPO in
2019, 2013, 2016, 1988 and 1993, respectively and as quarantine pest at Mexico and China in
2018 and 2021, respectively (EPPO, 2022).
7.3.A.2.2. Biology
The citrus root weevil is about 1 cm long when it is an adult. Its head and legs are black, and its
elytra are glossy black with broad bands of small yellowish-orange scales. It can stick to very
smooth surfaces because to the adhesive pads on its legs. The larva is a 2.5 cm long, plump, pale
grub with a dark head. A female weevil may lay 5,000 eggs, which she will scatter on leaves in
clusters. The larvae hatch from the eggs after a week, drop to the ground, and then tunnel down
to the host plant's roots. While the adult weevil does consume plant foliage, they feed for several
months on the roots of the plant (Jetter and Godfrey, 2009).
7.3.A.2.3. Hosts
A total of 270 different plant species, including citrus, sugarcane, avocado, cassava, vegetables,
potatoes, strawberries, woody field-grown ornamentals, sweet potatoes, papaya, guava,
mahogany, containerized ornamentals, and non-cultivated wild plants, are attacked by D.
abbreviatus (Thomas et al., 2019).

7.3.A.2.4. Distribution

Florida, Puerto Rico, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and the lower Antilles are all home to
D. abbreviatus. It was thought to solely be an issue in central Florida at the time it was introduced
to Florida. The southern two-thirds of the state are currently thought to have a problem with it
(Thomas et al., 2019).
North America: USA (Peck et al., 2014).

7.3.A.2.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that D. abbreviatus -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO 2022).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus plants,
as well as important pest for sugarcane, avocado, cassava, potato, guava, papaya, mahogany
etc. (Thomas et al., 2019).
• It is a serious pest of USA from where a large number of citruses are imported to Bangladesh.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. It has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• D. abbreviatus is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.2.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.2.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential

a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - No
• This pest is only found in USA region (EPPO, 2022).
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – No.
• There is no data about the survival of this pest during transport, storage
and transfer.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - No,
• Infected citrus plant soil and plant parts can introduce D. abbreviatus
into Bangladesh. Adults don't travel very far in the air after emerging
from the ground. Therefore, long-distance weevil distribution occurs
through the transportation of contaminated soil and containerized plants
that may include all weevil life stages. Additionally, soil residues on cars
may contain larval contamination. Therefore, it is not recommended to
enter Bangladesh from the USA. If fruit from the United States is
imported along with infested leaves (egg infection), this could be
dangerous (Jetter and Godfrey, 2009).
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate
is similar to places it is established? – Yes
• The primary hosts of D. abbreviatus are Citrus spp. Here, the host plant
is widely dispersed in Bangladesh, as are alternate hosts including
sugarcane, avocado, cassava, potato, guava, papaya, mahogany, etc.
Therefore, there is a good chance that this virus will spread to
Bangladesh (Thomas et al., 2019).
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.

Yes
and
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appears good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.2.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.2.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is major pest of Citrus. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant
material are imported from USA, there is possibility to establish the pest in
Bangladesh (Thomas et al., 2019).
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss

Yes
and

• It is estimated that D. abbreviatus causes about 70 million dollars in damage
annually in Florida. Estimates show the weevil infests more than 100,000
acres of citrus (Thomas et al., 2019).
c. Environmental Impact
• Using of synthetic insecticide to control D. abbreviatus is harmful for soil
and environment.
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.2.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.2.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.2.9. Risk Management Measures
• Chemical controls using chlorinated hydrocarbons against D. abbreviatus were
successful. Neem oil, neem leaf extract, and other botanicals are helpful in controlling
D. abbreviates by preventing egg laying on leaves and lowering egg viability. A wide
range of substances, including ants, parasitic wasps, at least one virus, Bacillus
thuringiensis, and a fungus adulticide, are being researched as potential biological pest
treatments for the weevil. To tackle the pest, irrigation water in affected crops in Florida
is released with the nematode Steinernema riobravis (Jetter and Godfrey, 2009).
7.3.A.2.10. References
EPPO, 2022. EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Jetter, K. M. and K. Godfrey. (2009). Diaprepes root weevil, a new California pest, will raise costs for
pest control and trigger quarantines. California Agriculture 63:3 121-6.
Peck, S.B., Thomas, M.C. and Turnbow, J.R.H. (2014). The diversity and distributions of the beetles
(Insecta: Coleoptera) of the Guadeloupe Archipelago (Grande-Terre, Basse-Terre, La Désirade,
Marie-Galante, Les Saintes, and Petite-Terre), Lesser Antilles. Insecta Mundi 0352, 1–156.
Thomas, J., Weissling, J.E., Peña, R.M., Giblin, D. and Knapp, J.J.L. (2019). Diaprepes root weevil.
University of Florida. https://entnemdept.ufl.edu/creatures/citrus/diaprepes_root_weevil.htm

7.3.A.3.
African citrus psyllid, Trioza erytreae

7.3.A.3.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: African citrus psyllid
Scientific name: Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio)
Synonyms: Aleurodes erytreae Del Guercio
Spanioza eritreae Del Guercio
Spanioza erythreae Del Guercio
Spanioza erytreae Del Guercio
Spanioza merwei
Trioza citri Laing
Trioza erythreae Del Guercio
Trioza merwei Pettey
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta
Order: Hemiptera
Suborder: Sternorrhyncha
Family: Triozidae
Genus: Trioza
Species: Trioza erytreae

EPPO Code: TRIZER. This pest has been included in EPPO A2 list: No. 46
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]
7.3.A.3.2. Biology
The eggs and first-instar nymphs are particularly vulnerable to dry weather and high heat
(temperatures above 32°). Green & Catling (1971) used the maximum saturation deficit as an
accurate predictor of the regional spread of T. erytreae based on this climatic profile and the
mortality of the psyllid. It thrives in cool, humid climates where citrus growth flushes tend to
last longer.
Although there are usually more female than male insect in the field, the sex ratio varies. Preoviposition lasts between three and seven days, but without young foliage, this time period is
significantly lengthened, and longevity is also increased. Two to four times a day, there is
mating, and the eggs may start to hatch right away. The sharp tip on the eggs is assumed to be
in charge of preserving a good internal water relationship since it is used to pierce through the
leaf epidermis. In the absence of males, females remain fertile for 11–16 days. Maximum egg
production happens around the midpoint of the female's lifespan, which is typically 17–50 days.
Up to 2000 eggs may be laid by each female. The lengths of both these periods are inversely
proportional to mean temperature and directly related to the nutritional value of the leaves.
Nymph development (five instars) takes place during the incubation period, which lasts 5–17
days, while the incubation period itself lasts 17–47 days. Nymph development seems to require
a temperature range of 10–12°C. There isn't a menopause. While van den Berg et al.,(1990)

researched mating, fertility, and oviposition in T. erytreae, van den Berg et al.,(1991a) focused
on the daily routines and habits of adults as well as egg hatching and moulting.
Under natural circumstances, T. erytreae transmits "Candidatus Liberibacter africanus" to areas
of Africa, Arabia, and various islands in the Indian Ocean (McClean & Oberholzer, 1965;
Gottwall, 2010). Additionally, it has been demonstrated that T. erytreae can spread Candidatus
Liberibacter asiaticus and Candidatus Liberibacter americanus (Ajene et al., 2020; Gottwall,
7.3.A.3.3. Hosts
T. erytreae is confined to Rutaceae, occurring on wild and ornamental hosts (Clausena anisata,
Vepris lanceolata) and on Citrus, especially lemons (C. limon) and limes (C. aurantiifolia).
Within the EPPO region, the host species are generally confined to countries surrounding the
Mediterranean Sea. The main hosts of interest are fruit trees: Calodendrum capense, Casimiroa
edulis, Choisya ternata, Citroncirus, Citrus aurantiifolia, Citrus australasica, Citrus deliciosa,
Citrus jambhiri, Citrus limon, Citrus maxima, Citrus medica, Citrus paradisi, Citrus reticulata,
Citrus sinensis, Citrus tangerina, Citrus trifoliata, Citrus unshiu, Citrus volkameriana, Citrus x
nobilis, Citrus, Clausena anisata, Fortunella, Murraya koenigii, Murraya paniculata, Rutaceae,
Vepris lanceolata, Vepris nobilis, Vepris, Zanthoxylum asiaticum, Zanthoxylum sp., x
Citrofortunella microcarpa.

7.3.A.3.4. Distribution

T. erytreae was found throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, as well as the
islands of St. Helena, Mauritius, Reunion, and Madagascar until the 1990s. This psyllid invaded
Madeira and the Canary Islands in Macaronesia in 1994 and 2002, respectively (West
Palaearctic). T. erytreae arrived on the continent of Europe in 2014, moving from Galicia in
northwest Spain to Lisbon in Portugal.
The T. erytreae individuals discovered in Europe (Madeira, Canary Islands, and Galicia) are
thought to have a similar haplotype and most likely come from South Africa, while the idea of a
Kenyan origin cannot be ruled out, according to a recent study (Ajene et al., 2020).
T. erytreae has a wider geographic range than Candidatus Liberibacter africanus, the causal
agent of the citrus huanglongbing (HLB) disease that was first linked to this vector. This is
because the vector is found in Portugal and Spain in Europe and Congo, Sudan, and Zambia in
Africa, where Candidatus Liberibacter africanus has not yet been identified.

EPPO Region: Portugal (mainland, Madeira), Spain (mainland, Islas Canárias)
Africa: Angola, Cameroon, Comoros, Congo, Democratic republic of the, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Reunion, Rwanda, Saint
Helena, Sao Tome & Principe, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Asia: Saudi Arabia, Yemen
7.3.A.3.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that T. erytreae -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]
• Like the other vector of citrus greening (Diaphorina citri), T. erytreae is listed as an A1
quarantine pest by EPPO (OEPP/EPPO, 1988) and is also a quarantine pest for CPPC and
OIRSA.
• In Asian countries where the Asian form of citrus huanglongbing (greening) disease is
present, its presence could facilitate spread and considerably add to the difficulties of
huanglongbing control.

• It would probably also be easy to develop and propagate in Mediterranean-climate citrusgrowing nations. Although biological control may be feasible, there is no assurance that it
will be able to keep populations at a level low enough to stop the spread of huanglongbing.
In addition to aiding in the spread of citrus huanglongbing disease, psyllids themselves have
a high potential for harm.
• It is a serious pest of South Africa from where large number of citrus fruits are imported to
Bangladesh.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the citrus. It has capability to cause direct
and indirect economic and ecological damage to many valuable fruits.
• T. erytreae is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.3.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.3.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• Until the 1990s, T. erytreae was present in Sub-Saharan Africa, Saudi Arabi
and the Yemen and on the islands of St. Helena, Mauritius, Reunion and
Madagascar. In 1994 and 2002, this psyllid invaded Madeira and the Canary
Islands, respectively, in Macaronesia (West Palaearctic). In 2014, T.
erytreae reached mainland Europe, where it spread from Galicia
(northwestern Spain) to Lisbon in Portugal.
• A recent study has suggested that the T. erytreae individuals found in
Europe (Madeira, Canary Islands and Galicia) have a similar haplotype and
most likely originated from South Africa, although the possibility of a
Kenyan origin cannot be excluded (Ajene et al., 2020).
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• T. erytreae thrives in warm and humid climates. It prefers temperatures
between 20 and 30 degrees Celsius, which is typical of many citrus-growing
regions around the world. The pest's eggs and nymphs (immature stages)
are often found on the underside of young, flush leaves where the
microclimate is humid and relatively stable.
• However, T. erytreae can survive in cooler conditions. For example, it has
been found in regions of Spain where winter temperatures can dip below 10
degrees Celsius. In such conditions, the pest's activity and reproduction may
slow down or cease, but it can become active again when temperatures rise.
• Females remain fertile for 11-16 days in the absence of males, and
maximum egg production occurs towards the middle of their life span,
which normally lasts 17-50 days. There are an incubation period of 6-15
days and nymphal development (five instars) takes 17-43 days, both periods
being inversely related to mean temperature and directly related to
nutritional value of the leaves.

Yes
and
Moderate

• This period of time taken for shipment through transportation pathways
from the above-mentioned exporting countries to Bangladesh is sufficient
enough for survival of this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in wrapping
(wooden boxes) and stored in normal conditions. So, the pests could survive
during transporting process.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - No,
• T. erytreae can spread locally by natural means of dispersal, over distances
of up to 1.5 km (van den Berg & Deacon, 1988). Eggs and nymphs may be
carried over longer distances on citrus material (budwood, grafted trees,
rootstock seedlings). Both adults and nymphs can acquire the causal agent
of huanglongbing, but only adults can transmit it (McClean 1974; Moll and
van Vuuren 1977). The illegal introduction of plant material can lead to the
introduction of the disease or the vector. Adults can survive for up to 12
days on recently harvested lemon fruits at 13.5 ± 2oC, 85.4 ± 10% RH,
under an L14 hours: D10 hours photoperiod (Urbaneja-Bernat et al., 2020).
Introduction on citrus fruits that have passed through packing house
processes involving brushing, washing and the removal of stems and leaves
is unlikely. But, it is not transmitted with citrus fruits. From South Africa,
we only imported citrus fruit. So, there is no risk for this pest to enter into
Bangladesh and establish.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• In regions where T. erytreae is present, it affects a wide variety of citrus
plants, including oranges, lemons, limes, grapefruits, and various citrus
hybrids. Although Trioza erytreae has not been reported in Bangladesh,
but the country has various species of citrus plants that are cultivated in
various regions of the country, particularly in the Sylhet Division,
Chittagong Hill Tracts, and the northern regions and could potentially serve
as hosts for the pest if it were to be introduced in the future.
• In terms of climate, Trioza erytreae generally thrives in warm and humid
climates, which are typical of many citrus-growing regions around the
world, including Bangladesh. The country's subtropical monsoon climate,
characterized by high temperature and humidity, especially during the
monsoon season, could potentially support the survival and proliferation of
this pest if it were to be introduced.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.3.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.3.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?

Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• These hosts primarily belong to the citrus family and include numerous
commercially important species. Therefore, it is a high risk, if plant and plant
material are imported from South Africa there is possibility to establish the
pest in Bangladesh.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• T. erytreae results principally from its role as a vector of huanglongbing, the
most damaging citrus disease in the world (Gottwald, 2010). Heavy
infestations with T. erytreae also cause severe leaf distortion, the
development of conspicuous pits on the leaf surface and the development of
sooty mold on the excreted honeydew.
c. Environmental Impact
• Experience in areas to which T. erytreae already has spread or into which it
has recently been introduced suggests that the eradication of this species is
almost impossible (Cocuzza et al., 2017).
• Biological control may be possible, at least on islands, but there is no
guarantee that it could keep populations at sufficiently low levels to prevent
transmission of huanglongbing.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.3.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.3.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.3.9. Risk Management Measures

• Considering the severity of huanglongbing, EPPO has recommended to prohibit the
importation of citrus plants for planting and cut branches or buds of citrus from areas or
countries where citrus huanglongbing (or either of its vectors) are present.
• It is also forbidden to import fruit from third countries with their peduncles and leaves.
• In disease free countries as those of the Mediterranean area, awareness, monitoring,
surveillance, pest risk assessment, quarantine measures and action plans are advised
(Duran-Vila et al., 2014; Siverio et al., 2017).
• Procedures for official control with the aim of detecting, containing and eradicating
huanglongbing and its vectors are provided in the EPPO Standard PM 9/27 (EPPO,
7.3.A.3.10. References
Ajene IJ, Khami FM, van Asch B, Pietersen G, Seid N, Rwomushana I, Ombura FLO, Momanyi G,
Finyange P, Rasowo BA, Tanga CM, Mohammed S, Ekesi S (2020) Distribution of Candidatus
Liberibacter species in Eastern Africa, and the first report of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus
in Kenya. Scientific Reports 10, 3919 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60712-0
EPPO (2020) PM 9/27 (1) ‘Candidatus Liberibacter’ species that are casual agents of Huanglongbing
disease of citrus and their vectors: procedures for official control. EPPO Bulletin, 50, 122-141.
Gottwald TR (2010) Current epidemiological understanding of citrus huanglongbing. Annual Review of
Phytopathology, 48, 119-139.
Green GC, Catling HD (1971) Weather-induced mortality of the citrus psylla Trioza erytreae, a vector of
greening virus, in some citrus-producing areas of South Africa. Agricultural Meteorology 8, 305-
McClean APD, Oberholzer PCJ (1965) Citrus psylla, a vector of the greening disease of sweet orange.
South African Journal of Agricultural Science 8, 297-298.
Urbaneja-Bernat P, Hernández-Suárez E, Urbaneja A, Tena A (2020) Preventive measures to limit the
spread of Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio) (Hemiptera: Psyllidae) in mainland Europe. Journal of
Applied Entomology. https://doi.org/10.1111/jen.12771
Van den Berg MA (1990) The citrus psylla, Trioza erytreae: a review. Agriculture, Ecosystems and
Environment 30, 171-194.

7.3.A.4.
Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly, Ceratitis capitate

7.3.A.4.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Mediterranean fruit fly/Medfly
Scientific name: Ceratitis capitate
Synonyms: Ceratitis citriperda MacLeay
Ceratitis hispanica De Brême
Pardalaspis asparagi Bezzi
Tephritis capitata Wiedemann
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta
Order: Diptera
Family: Tephritidae

Genus: Ceratitis
Species: Ceratitis capitata

EPPO Code: ANOLCN. This pest has been included in EPPO A2 list: No. 105
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2020; EPPO, 2021]
7.3.A.4.2. Biology
Eggs are placed beneath the host fruit's skin, following the general life cycle of other Ceratitis
species that infest fruits. Within the fruit, three larval stages grow and consume plant tissue.
When fully developed, the larva of the third instar leaves the fruit, burrows into the ground, and
pupates inside a puparium. The puparium will release the adult fly. According to Carey et al.,
(2008), adult Ceratitis capitata flies have an average lifespan of 11 weeks for males and 9 weeks
for females, while some can live even longer. Between 3 and 6 days following the adult
emergence, females begin laying eggs in fruit (Manrakhan & Lux, 2006). The larval period lasts
between 5 and 21 days between 30°C and 15°C (Duyck & Quilici, 2002). At 30°C to 15°C, the
pupal stage lasts for 8–35 days. At 25°C, it can complete its entire life cycle in around 32 days
(Vargas et al., 1984). According to Diamantidis et al., (2009), C. capitata populations have
evolved to adopt various life history strategies (in terms of longevity, reproductive maturity, and
fecundity) in response to altering environmental factors. According to the environmental
circumstances and local bioclimate conditions, resistance to the effects of climate stress (such as
cold and heat, desiccation, and malnutrition), demography, population fluctuations, and number
of annual generations also vary (Nyamukondiwa et al., 2013; Weldon et al., 2018).
7.3.A.4.3. Hosts
The larvae of the highly polyphagous C. capitata species grow in a broad variety of unrelated
fruits. More than 350 different confirmed hosts from 70 different plant families have been
reported from all over the world. It is also connected to numerous additional plant species, the
host status of which is uncertain. A comprehensive list of hosts with thorough references may
be found in the USDA Compendium of Fruit Fly Host Information (CoFFHI) (Liquido et al.,

Major hosts: Annona cherimola (cherimoya); Citrus aurantiifolia, Citrus aurantium, Citrus
clementina, Citrus deliciosa, Citrus latifolia, Citrus limon, Citrus lumia, Citrus maxima, Citrus
medica, Citrus paradisi, Citrus reshni, Citrus reticulata, Citrus sinensis, Citrus trifoliata, Citrus
unshiu, Capsicum annuum (bell pepper); Coffea; Ficus carica (common fig); Malus domestica
(apple); Prunus (stone fruit); Prunus salicina (Japanese plum); Citrus; Psidium guajava (guava)
and Theobroma cacao (cocoa).
Minor hosts: Averrhoa bilimbi (bilimbi); Averrhoa carambola (carambola); Capsicum
frutescens (chilli); Carica papaya (pawpaw); Cinnamomum verum (cinnamon); Citrus
aurantiifolia (lime); Citrus aurantium (sour orange); Citrus limetta (sweet lemon tree); Citrus
limon (lemon); Cucumis (melons, cucuimbers, gerkins); Mangifera indica (mango); Punica
granatum (pomegranate); Solanum lycopersicum (tomato); Solanum melongena (aubergine) and
Ziziphus jujuba (common jujube).

7.3.A.4.4. Distribution

According to De Meyer et al. (2004), Ceratitis capitata originates in Sub-Saharan Africa, most
likely in Eastern or Southern Africa. It is widespread in dry, hot areas but appears to be less
common in wetter, cooler climates. It originated in Africa and has since spread to many regions
of the globe, first to the Mediterranean Basin and then to Latin America, Australia, and Hawaii.
All of the islands in the western Indian Ocean also introduce it. See Ruiz-Arce et al. for a recent
global phylogeography based on mitochondrial DNA (2020). C. capitata is frequently found in

California (US), however systematic eradication activities are conducted there. Papadopoulos et
al. (2013) questioned the notion that populations are completely eliminated and argued that
hardly perceptible populations are established and resurface frequently. Additionally, there are
sporadic data from a number of nations beyond the defined range.

EPPO Region: Albania, Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, France,
Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, Portugal, Romania,
Russia, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, Türkiye, Ukraine.
Africa: Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Comoros, Congo, Congo, Democratic republic of the, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Reunion, Saint Helena, Sao
Tome & Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Asia: Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen.
North America: United States of America (Hawaii).
Central America and Caribbean: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama.
South America: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru,
Uruguay, Venezuela.
Oceania: Australia (Western Australia).

7.3.A.4.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that C. capitata -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2020; EPPO, 2021]
• C. capitata is a highly invasive species. It has a high dispersive ability, a very large host
range and a tolerance of both natural and cultivated habitats over a comparatively wide
temperature range. It has a high economic impact, affecting production, control costs and
market access. It has successfully established in many parts of the world, often as a result of
multiple introductions (Malacrida et al., 2007).
• will be potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is a major pest of several
crops like tea, citrus, orchids, mango, papawa etc. which are also important crops in our
country.
• The degree of polyphagy of C. capitataits numerous economically important hostplants, and
the rapid escalation of international trade in fresh plant material and produce, mean that this
species presents a high risk of introduction.
• C. capitata is an important pest in Africa and has spread to almost every other continent to
become the single most important pest species in the family. It is highly polyphagous and
causes damage to a very wide range of unrelated fruit crops. In Mediterranean countries, it is
particularly damaging on citrus and peaches. It also transmits fruit-rotting fungi (Cayol et al.,
• C. capitata is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.4.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.1.4 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?

Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• Original from tropical Africa, C. capitata widely spread to the
Mediterranean Basin, Southern Europe and most tropical and subtropical
regions throughout the world (Malacrida et al., 2007; EPPO, 2013). This
species was also reported to be present in countries neighboring to
Romania, such as Serbia (Glavendekic et al., 2005), Hungary (Bodor et al.,
2011) and Bulgaria (Staneva, 2006). The extensive studies found in recent
literature, that evaluated the potential of the geographic distribution of C.
capitata in climate-based scenarios, estimated that it poses great abilities to
penetrate into zones with wide climatic regimes, outside of its current
distribution in Europe (Baini et al., 2009; Vera et al., 2002, De Meyer et
al., 2008). This species is native to both the Ethiopian and Palearctic
regions, and introduced populations have since been discovered in all of the
biogeographic regions. The pest already established in many countries from
where a varietal fruit are imported every year. These countries are Jordan
(EPPO, 2014; CABI/EPPO, 2015); Lebanon (EPPO, 2014; CABI/EPPO,
2015); Saudi Arabia (EPPO, 2014; CABI/EPPO, 2015); Syria (Ali et. al.,
2015); Turkey (Fimiani,1989); Cameroon (EPPO, 2014; CABI/EPPO,
2015); Congo (EPPO, 2014; CABI/EPPO, 2015); Egypt (EPPO, 2014;
CABI/EPPO, 2015) etc.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• The eggs of C. capitata are laid below the skin of the host fruit. They hatch
within 2-4 days (up to 16-18 days in cool weather) and the larvae feed for
another 6-11 days (at 13-28°C). Pupariation is in the soil under the host
plant, the adults emerge after 6-11 days (24-26°C; longer in cool
conditions) (Christenson and Foote, 1960), and after adult emergence,
ovarian development at 25°C takes 5 days (Duyck and Quilici, 2002). The
thermal constant for development from egg to adult is 260°D (Duyck and
Quilici, 2002). Christenson and Foote (1960) report that adult C. capitata
live for up to 2 months (field-caged). The transport, storage and transfer
duration of fruits is about 20 days and the storage temperature for fruits is
about 15-200C in our country, so the duration and as well as the storage
condition is favorable for its survival.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes,
• The major risk is from the import of fruit containing larvae, either as part
of cargo, or through the smuggling of fruit in airline passenger baggage or
mail. For example, in New Zealand, Baker and Cowley (1991) recorded 7-
33 interceptions of fruit flies per year in cargo and 10-28 per year in
passenger baggage. Private individuals who successfully smuggle fruit are
likely to discard it when they discover that it is rotten. This method of
introduction has been suggested to account for the discovery of at least one
fly in a trap in California every year (Foote et al., 1993), although this
notion has been strongly criticized by others that suggest the presence of a
barely detectable, establish population (Papadopoulos et al., 2013).
Transportation of fresh fruit by air (either commercially, or incidentally by
Yes
and
High

travelers) has greatly increased the risk of accidental introduction of this
species into other parts of the world, and strong efforts are made to prevent
its spread. (Copeland, et al., 2002; Dekker and Messing, 2005; Thomas, et
al., 2001).
• Natural Dispersal: The majority of mark-release-recapture studies on
dispersal of C. capitata obtain recaptures no more than 1 km from the
release site, although these results may represent limitations of the trapping
array. There is evidence that C. capitata can fly at least 20 km (Fletcher,
• Movement in Trade: The transport of infested fruits is the major means of
movement and dispersal to previously uninfested areas. Some host fruits
are only infested when ripe, and this has been the basis for an 'infestationfree quarantine procedure' for avocados exported from Hawaii to mainland
USA. This was recently called into question when fruits still on the tree
were found to be infested (Liquido et al., 1995).
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• C. capitata is an extremely polyphagous species, more than 350 cultivated
and wild fruit and vegetable species having been recorded as host plants for
it (Thomas et al., 2001). Among these, the fruit crops of high commercial
importance as plums (Prunus spp.), peaches (P. persica), apricots (P.
armeniaca), cherries (P. cerasi), apples (Malus domestica), pears (Pyrus
communis), mandarins (Citrus reticulata), oranges (Citrus sinensis),
lemons (Citrus limon), grapefruits (Citrus paradisi), Zara lebu (C. medica),
figs (Ficus carica), persimmon (Diospyros kaki), jujube (Ziziphus jujuba),
Psidium guajava (guava), kiwifruits (Actinidia deliciosa), Capsicum
frutescens (chilli); Carica papaya (pawpaw), Mangifera indica (mango);
Punica granatum (pomegranate); Solanum lycopersicum (tomato);
Solanum melongena (aubergine) are also included.
• Host range of C. capitata are very common in Bangladesh.
• C. capitata lives in Mediterranean climates, which tends to coincide with
where Citrus is grown). Although it is able to tolerate low temperatures, its
northward expansion in Europe appears to have been prevented by the cold
winters. The lower developmental temperature for larvae is 10.2°C (Duyck
& Quilici, 2002). Adult activity is reduced or suspended at higher
temperatures around 30°C, when the flies seek out cooler areas (Cayol,
1996). In the absence of behavioural thermoregulation, the lower and upper
temperatures that permit coordinated movement of adults are within the
range of 5.4–6.6°C and 42.4–43.0°C, respectively.
• So, the climatic requirements for growth and development of C. capitata,
is more or less similar with the climatic condition of Bangladesh.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appears good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.4.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.4.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• C. capitata is an extremely polyphagous species, more than 350 cultivated
and wild fruit and vegetable species having been recorded as host plants for
it (Thomas et al., 2001). Among these, the fruit crops of high commercial
importance as plums (Prunus spp.), lemons (Citrus limon), Zara lebu (C.
medica), figs (Ficus carica), persimmon (Diospyros kaki), jujube (Ziziphus
jujuba), Psidium guajava (guava), Capsicum frutescens (chilli); Carica
papaya
(pawpaw),
Mangifera
indica
(mango);
Punica
granatum
(pomegranate); Solanum lycopersicum (tomato); Solanum melongena
(aubergine) are also included.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• C. capitata is an important pest in Africa and has spread to almost every other
continent to become the single most important pest species in its family. It is
highly polyphagous and causes damage to a very wide range of unrelated fruit
crops. In Mediterranean countries, it is particularly damaging to citrus and
peach. It may also transmit fruit-rotting fungi (Cayol et al., 1994).
• Damage to fruit crops is frequently high and may reach 100% (Fimiani, 1989;
Fischer-Colbrie and Busch-Petersen, 1989). In Central America, losses to
coffee crops were estimated at 5-15% and the berries matured earlier and fell
to the ground with reduced quality (Enkerlin et al., 1989). As in areas where
the fly is endemic, in outbreak conditions the economic impacts include
reduced production, increased control costs and lost markets.
• Fruit-growers and their governments around the world spend millions of
dollars a year trying to control this pest and prevent it from spreading to new
locations. ("Common Pests of Summer Fruit in Western Australia", 2003;
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2003; Mau and Kessing, 1992).
• Serious economic damage is caused by this insect in Tunisia; in mixed fruit
cultivation crop losses can be from 80 to 100% (Jerraya, 2003). Citrus is the
most affected host crop, with direct annual losses attributed to C. capitata of
up to 38% of annual income from Tunisian citrusproduction (Driouchi, 1990;
Lebdi Grissa, 2010).

c. Environmental Impact
• No impact of C. capitata on the natural environment or on other species has
been observed, although the decline in populations of Ceratitis catoirii on
Mauritius and Réunion may be due in part to competition from C. capitata
(Duyck et al., 2006).
• Moreover, use of this chemical insecticide for controlling the pest may harm
to the environment and destroying the natural control system in the field.
• The social impact on fruit growers and their families caused by the presence
or introduction of C. capitata is severe, mostly through reduced or lost

Yes
and
High

income and increased costs of control. As a recognized and serious quarantine
pest, loss of markets to producers in outbreak areas is also often severe.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.4.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.4.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.4.9. Risk Management Measures

• Avoid importation of infested fruits from those countries, where this pest is available.
• Consignments of fruits from countries where C. capitata occurs should be inspected for
symptoms of infestation and those suspected should be cut open in order to look for
larvae.
• EPPO recommends (OEPP/EPPO, 1990) that fruits of Citrus or Prunus should have been
treated by an appropriate method, e.g. in transit by cold treatment (e.g. 10, 11, 12, 14, 15
days at 0.0, 0.6, 1.1, 1.7 or 2.2°C, respectively,) or, for certain types of fruits, by vapour
heat (e.g. keeping at 44°C for 8 h) (USDA, 1994), forced hot-air (Armstrong et al., 1995)
or hot water treatment (Sharp & Picho-Martinez, 1989).
• Ethylene dibromide was previously widely used as a fumigant but is now generally
withdrawn because of its carcinogenicity; methyl bromide is less satisfactory, damaging
many fruits and reducing their shelf-life, although treatment schedules are available for
specific cases (e.g. 32 g/m3 for 2-4 h; USDA, 1994).
• Irradiation has been proposed as disinfestation method (Ohta et al., 1989).
• A combination of methyl bromide fumigation and cold treatment is also recommended
against C. capitata.
• Wrapping fruits in shrinkwrap film has been investigated as a possible method of
disinfesting fruits (Jang, 1990).
7.3.A.4.10. References

Armstrong, J.W.; Hu, B.K.S.; Brown, S.A. (1995) Single-temperature forced hot-air quarantine treatment
to control fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae) in papaya. J. Econo. Entomo. 88, 678-682.
Carey JR, Papadopoulos NK, Muller HG, Katsoyannos BI, Kouloussis NA, Wang JL, Wachter K, Yu W
& Liedo P (2008) Age structure changes and extraordinary lifespan in wild medfly populations.
Aging cell 7, 426-437.
De Meyer M, Copeland RS, Wharton RA & McPheron BA (2004) On the geographical origin of the
medfly, Ceratitis capitata (Wiedemann). Proceedings 6th International Symposium on Fruit
Flies of Economic Importance (Stellenbosch, South Africa), 45-53.
Diamantidis AD, Papadopoulos NT, Nakas CT, Wu S, Müller HG & Carey JR (2009) Life history
evolution in a globally invading tephritid: patterns of survival and reproduction in medflies from
six world regions. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 97, 106-117.
Duyck PF & Quilici S (2002) Survival and development of different life stages of three Ceratitis spp.
(Diptera: Tephritidae) reared at five constant temperatures. Bulletin of Entomological Research
92, 461-469.
Jang, E.B. (1990) Fruit fly disinfestation of tropical fruits using semipermeable shrinkwrap film. Acta
Horticulturae No. 269, 453-458.
Liquido NJ, McQuate GT, Hanlin MA & Suiter KA (2020) Host plants of the Mediterranean fruit fly,
Ceratitis capitata (Wiedemann), Version 4.0. Available online at: USDA Compendium of Fruit
Fly Host Information (CoFFHI), Edition 4.0. https://coffhi.cphst.org/
Manrakhan A & Lux SA (2006) Contribution of natural food sources to reproductive behavior, fecundity
and longevity of Ceratitis cosyra, C. fasciventris and C. capitata (Diptera: Tephritidae). Bulletin
of Entomological Research 96, 259-268.
Nyamukondiwa C, Weldon CW, Chown SL, le Roux PC & Terblanche JS (2013) Thermal biology,
population fluctuations and implications of temperature extremes for the management of two
globally significant insect pests. Journal of Insect Physiology 59, 1199-1211.
Ohta, A.T.; Kaneshiro, K.Y.; Kurihara, J.S.; Kanegawa, K.M.; Nagamine, L.R. (1989) Gamma radiation
and cold treatments for the disinfestation of the Mediterranean fruit fly in California-grown
oranges and lemons. Pacific Science 43, 17-26.
Papadopoulos NT, Plant RE & Carey JR (2013) From trickle to flood: the large-scale, cryptic invasión
of California by tropical fruit flies. Proceedings of the Royal Society B Biological Sciences 280,
Sharp JL, Picho-Martinez H, 1989. Hot-water quarantine treatment to control fruit flies in mangoes
imported into the United States from Peru. J. Econo. Entomol., 83(5):1940-1943
(/isc/abstract/19911154790)
USDA (1994) Treatment manual. USDA/APHIS, Frederick, USA.
Vargas RI, Miyashita D & Nishida T (1984) Life-history and demographic parameters of three laboratoryreared Tephritids (Diptera: Tephritidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of America 77,
651-656.
Weldon CW, Nyamukondiwa C, Karsten M, Chown SL & Terblanche JS (2018) Geographic variation
and plasticity in climate stress resistance among southern African populations of Ceratitis
capitata (Wiedemann) (Diptera: Tephritidae). Scientific Reports 8, 9849.

7.3.A.5.
Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera tryoni

7.3.A.5.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Queensland fruit fly
Scientific name: Bactrocera tryoni (Froggatt)
Synonyms: Chaetodacus tryoni (Froggatt)
Dacus ferrugineus tryoni (Froggatt)
Dacus tryoni (Froggatt)

Strumeta tryoni (Froggatt)
Tephritis tryoni Froggatt

Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta
Order: Diptera
Family: Tephritidae
Genus: Bactrocera
Species: Bactrocera tryoni

EPPO Code: DACUTR. This pest has been included in EPPO A1 list: No. 235
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]
7.3.A.5.2. Biology
The general life cycle is as like those of other Bactrocera species infesting fruits: eggs are
deposited inside fruits by the female puncturing the fruit skin. Three larval stages develop inside
the fruit, feeding on the plant tissue. Once mature the third instar larva will leave the fruit, dig
down into the soil and turn into a pupa enclosed in a puparium. The adult fly will emerge from
the puparium. During summer larvae mature in 7-10 days, while the pupal stage lasts about 10
days. The full life cycle can be completed in 2.5 weeks during summer but will take considerably
longer in cooler conditions. A detailed overview of developmental rates and population dynamic
models in relation to different weather conditions in Australia, is given in Yonow et al. (2004).
Models predict 12-15 generations in the tropical parts of Australia, to 3-4 generations in Southern
New South Wales (Clarke, 2019). Adults usually live around 80 days but can survive 7 to 8
months when overwintering (Clarke, 2019). The ability of B. tryoni to survive repeated frosts
has been studied by Meats & Fitt (1987). In their review of overwintering of B. tryoni, Clarke et
al. (2019) state that available data show the fly to overwinter almost exclusively as an adult.
7.3.A.5.3. Hosts
Bactrocera tryoni has a wide range of hosts. In Australia, it has been reported from 234 plant
species, belonging to 49 different families, according to the catalogue compiled by Hancock et
al. (2000). Leblanc et al. (2012) gives a list of host plant records for the adventive populations
in Pacific Islands. In total, it is reported from more than 250 different hosts. Fitt (1986) states
that adults of B. tryoni exhibit no preference in the species of fruits on which they will lay eggs,
but Clarke et al. (2011) argue that data on relative susceptibility are largely missing. The main
hosts of interest are fruit trees: Annona, Averrhoa carambola, avocados (Persea americana),
Citrus, Citrus aurantiifolia (lime), Citrus aurantium (sour orange), Citrus limetta (sweet lemon
tree), Citrus limon (lemon), Citrus maxima (pummelo), Citrus medica (citron), guavas (Psidium
guajava), Malus, mangoes (Mangifera indica), passion fruits (Passiflora edulis), pawpaws
(Carica papaya), peaches (Prunus persica), plums (Prunus domestica) and Pyrus. However,
vegetables such as tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum) are also infested. Many tree fruit crops
of the EPPO region is potential hosts.

7.3.A.5.4. Distribution

This species is found in Eastern Australia, from the Northern Territory, and Queensland
southwards to New South Wales and the eastern part of Victoria. It is also reported from the
Torres Strait Islands. See Dominiak & Mapson (2017) for a review of the distribution in Eastern

Australia. It was introduced and became established in French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and
Pitcairn Island (Leblanc et al., 2012). It has been introduced in other areas but eradicated.
EPPO region: Absent.
North America: USA (absent, formerly present, (EPPO, 2022)).
South America: Chile (absent, but eradicated; (EPPO, 2022)).
Oceania: Australia (New South Wales, Northern Territory, Queensland, Victoria), French
Polynesia, New Caledonia, Pitcairn (EPPO, 2022)
EU: Absent.

7.3.A.5.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that B. tryoni -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [CABI, 2023; EPPO, 2022]
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of many
cultivated plants including most characteristically fruits: Averrhoa carambola, avocados
(Persea americana), Citrus, guavas (Psidium guajava), mangoes (Mangifera indica), and
pawpaws (Carica papaya). However, vegetables such as tomatoes (Lycopersicon
esculentum) are also infested.
• It is a serious pest of Australia from where a large number of fruits are imported to
Bangladesh.
• Bactrocera tryoni is a known pest of several fruit and vegetable crops in the area where it is
present. It can be moved in trade with infested fruit. However, taken into consideration that
the species co-occurred with Ceratitis capitata and displaced the latter in eastern Australia
(Dominiak & Mapson, 2017), it is considered likely that B. tryoni could survive in parts of
the EPPO region where C. capitata currently occurs. Transient populations could have
impacts on the export of host fruit from the EPPO region. The EFSA Panel on Plant Health,
in their Pest Categorization of non-EU Tephritidae (EFSA, 2020) placed B. tryoni on the list
of fruit flies that satisfy the criteria to be regarded as a potential Union quarantine pest for
the EU.
• The major risk is from the importation of fruit containing larvae, either as part of cargo, or
through the smuggling of fruit in airline passenger baggage or mail. For example, in New
Zealand Baker and Cowley (1991) recorded 7-33 interceptions of fruit flies per year in cargo
and 10-28 per year in passenger baggage. Private individuals who successfully smuggle fruit
are likely to discard it when they discover that it is rotten.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits. It has capability to cause direct
and indirect economic and ecological damage to many valuable cultivated crops and fruits.
• B. tryoni is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.5.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.5.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
c. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes

• This pest has been established in many Oceania countries including
Australia, New Zealand [EPPO, 2022]. A huge amount of mango was
imported from Thailand, Australia, India, Pakistan, Philippine, etc (DAE,
2022). In Australia, B. tryoni is very common pest.
d. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• The adult females of B. tryoni lay eggs below the skin of the host fruit.
These hatch within 1-3 days and the larvae feed for 10-31 days (Christenson
& Foote, 1960). This period taken for shipment through transportation
pathways from the above-mentioned exporting countries to Bangladesh is
sufficient enough for survival of this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in
wrapping (wooden boxes) and stored in normal conditions. So, the pests
could survive during transporting process.
• On the other hand, the adults are best able to survive low temperatures.
Bactrocera spp. generally having a normal torpor threshold of 7°C,
dropping as low as 2°C in winter. The ability of B. tryoni to survive repeated
frosts has been studied by Meats & Fitt (1987). Sutherst & Maywald (1991)
have used the CLIMEX model to describe the potential for population
growth of B. tryoni in Australia, together with the climatic factors which
limit its geographical distribution and abundance.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes,
• Adult flight and the transport of infested fruits are the main means of
movement and dispersal to previously uninfested areas. Many Bactrocera
spp. can fly 50-100 km (Fletcher, 1989).
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• B. tryoni is the most serious insect pest of fruit and vegetable crops in
Australia, and it infests all commercial fruit crops, other than pineapple
(Drew, 1982). Most of the data given here are from the host catalogue of
Hancock et al. (2000), much of which derives from host data gathered in a
major survey in the Cairns area. That revised list recorded B. tryoni from
49 families of plants, represented by 234 species. In addition to the hosts
listed, Garcinia dulcis, Diplocyclos palmatus, Flaacourtia inermis,
Sandoricum indicum, Artocarpus odoratissima, Casimiroa tetrameria,
Murraya exotica and Solanum muricatum are economically important hosts
of B. tryoni. Other major wild hosts are Annona atemoya, Terminalia
aridicola, T. muelleri, T. platyphylla, T. sericocarpa, T. subacroptera,
Syzgium suborbiculare, S. tierneyanum and Nauclea orientalis. is highly
polyphagous,
• It is an important pest of many cultivated plants including most
characteristically fruits: avocados (Persea americana), Citrus, Fortunella,
guavas (Psidium guajava), Malus, mangoes (Mangifera indica), passion
fruits (Passiflora edulis), pawpaws (Carica papaya), peaches (Prunus

Yes
and
High

persica), plums (Prunus domestica) and Pyrus. However, vegetables such
as tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum) are also infested, but seldom
cucurbits.
• B. tryoni would be unable to survive the winter in the EPPO region, except
in the south. The adults are best able to survive low temperatures,
Bactrocera spp. generally having a normal torpor threshold of 7°C,
dropping as low as 2°C in winter. The ability of B. tryoni to survive repeated
frosts has been studied by Meats & Fitt (1987). Sutherst & Maywald (1991)
have used the CLIMEX model to describe the potential for population
growth of B. tryoni in Australia, together with the climatic factors which
limit its geographical distribution and abundance.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.5.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.5.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is an important pest of many cultivated plants including most
characteristically fruits: Annona, Averrhoa carambola, avocados (Persea
americana), Citrus, Fortunella, guavas (Psidium guajava), Malus, mangoes
(Mangifera indica), passion fruits (Passiflora edulis), pawpaws (Carica
papaya), peaches (Prunus persica), plums (Prunus domestica) and Pyrus.
However, vegetables such as tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum) are also
infested. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant material are imported
from Australia there is possibility to establish the pest in Bangladesh.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits, vegetables and other crops for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• In Australia, B. tryoni is a serious pest of a wide variety of unrelated fruit and
vegetable crops (Dominiak, 2012). Sutherst et al. (2000) estimated the annual
cost in Australia to be between 25.7 and 49.9 million AUD.
• There are about 4,500 species of tephritid flies (Diptera: Tephritidae).
Approximately one third are frugivorous and around 250 are considered
economic pests, with 23 of these known to be serious pests in Australia,
Oceania and tropical Asia (White and Elson-Harris, 1994; Vijaysegaran,
1997). Adults of frugivorous Tephritidae lay their eggs beneath the skin of
sound ripening fruit; the larvae feed within the fruit and cause direct damage
and induce decay and premature fruit drop (Allwood and Leblanc, 1997).

Yes
and
High

• The percentage of produce lost has been estimated to be 10-50% in tropical
Asia and Oceania and higher levels can occur in other parts of the world if
control measures are not in place (Allwood and Leblanc, 1997).
• B. tryoni has a permanent presence in the eastern Australian states as well as
the Northern Territory and the north of Western Australia (Meats et al., 2008;
Cameron et al., 2010). Various statutory authorities have estimated economic
losses in Australia due to B. tryoni to be between $28.5 million and $100
million per annum (Sutherst et al., 2000).
c. Environmental Impact
• Impact on Natural Habitats: Impacts on natural habitats are unlikely
because B. tryoni is a generalist and is mainly abundant in crops, villages and
towns, and in natural habitats it would be only one of several fruit fly species
present (Drew et al., 1984; Raghu et al., 2000).
• Impact on Biodiversity: Impacts on biodiversity are also unlikely for the
same reasons as for impacts on natural habitats. However, as far as fruit flies
are concerned an unequivocal answer to the question - whether there is an
impact of a pest species on other species in a district - should be assessed
only by experiment or by incubating field-sampled fruit individually to rear
out and identify surviving adult insects (Gibbs, 1967; Fitt, 1986). Conversely,
frugivorous birds and rodents can destroy a large percentage of wild fruit in
some places that would be otherwise available to fruit flies or have fruit fly
larvae already in them (Drew, 1987).
• Impact on human health: Adult fruit fly can be controlled with methyl
eugenol traps (Lakshmanan et al. 1973), bait sprays, pheromone mating
disruption, and pesticide applications to fruit (Abbas et al., 2000). Larvae
inside mango fruit can be killed by gamma irradiation (Heather et al., 1991).
The residual toxicity of the applied chemical insecticides on fruits and
irradiated fruits would have a high-risk potential for environment and
human health.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.5.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.5.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.5.9. Risk Management Measures

Consignments of fruits from countries or regions where B. tryoni occurs should be inspected for
symptoms of infestation and those suspected should be cut open to look for larvae. Possible
measures include that such fruits should come from an area where B. tryoni does not occur, or
from a place of production found free from the pest by regular inspection for 3 months before
harvest. Cold treatment and irradiation are described in the USDA treatment manual (USDA,
2021). Annex 16 to 18 of ISPM 28 Phytosanitary treatments for regulated pests (FAO, 2015)
describe a cold treatment for B. tryoni on Citrus sinensis, Citrus reticulata x C. sinensis and
Citrus limon, respectively. Annex 5 of ISPM 28 Phytosanitary treatments for regulated pests
(FAO, 2009) describes an irradiation treatment for Bactrocera tryoni.
Plants of host species transported with roots from countries where B. tryoni occurs should be
free from soil, or the soil should be treated against puparia. The plants should not carry fruits.

7.3.A.5.10. References
Allwood AJ, Leblanc L, 1997. Losses caused by fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae) in seven Pacific Island
countries. Management of fruit flies in the Pacific, ACIAR Proceedings Series 76 208-211.
Christenson, L.D.; Foote, R.H. (1960) Biology of fruit flies. Annual Review of Entomology 5, 171-175.
Clarke AR (2019). Biology and Management of Bactrocera and Related Fruit Flies. CAB International,
Wallingford, xiv+254pp
Clarke AR, Powell KS, Weldon CW & Taylor PW (2011). The ecology of Bactrocera tryoni (Diptera:
Tephritidae): what do we know to assist pest management? Annals of Applied Biology 158: 26-
Dominiak BC & Mapson R (2017). Revised distribution of Bactrocera tryoni in eastern Australia and
effect on possible incursions of Mediterranean fruit fly: development of Australia’s eastern
trading block. Journal of Economic Entomology. 110: 2459-2465.
EFSA PLH Panel (EFSA Panel on Plant Health), Bragard C, Dehnen-Schmutz K, Di Serio F, Gonthier
P, Jacques MA, Jaques Miret JA, Justesen AF, Magnusson CS, Milonas P, Navas-Cortes JA,
Parnell S, Potting R, Reignault PL, Thulke HH, Van der Werf W, Vicent Civera A, Yuen J,
Zappalà L, Bali EM, Papadopoulos N, Papanastassiou S, Czwienczek E & MacLeod A (2020).
Pest
categorization
of
non-EU
Tephritidae.
EFSA
Journal.
18:
5931,
62pp.
https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5931
EPPO, 2022. EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
FAO (2009) Annex 5 Irradiation treatment for Bactrocera tryoni. Rome, IPPC, FAO.
https://assets.ippc.int/static/media/files/publication/en/2016/06/PT_05_2009_En_2016-04-
22_PostCPM11_InkAm.pdf
FAO (2015) Annex 16 Cold treatment for Bactrocera tryoni on Citrus sinensis. Rome, IPPC, FAO.
https://assets.ippc.int/static/media/files/publication/en/2016/06/PT_17_2015_En_2016-05-
27_PostCPM11_InkAm.pdf
Fitt GP (1986). The roles of adult and larval specialisations in limiting the occurrence of five species of
Dacus in cultivated fruits. Oecologia 69, 101-109.
Heather, N.W.; Corcoran, R.J.; Banos, C. (1991) Disinfestation of mangoes with gamma irradiation
against two Australian fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae). Journal of Economic Entomology 84:
1304-1307.
Leblanc L, Vueti ET, Drew RAI & Allwood AJ (2012). Host plant records for fruit flies (Diptera:
Tephritidae: Dacini) in the Pacific Islands. Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomological Society.
44: 11-53.
Meats A & Fitt GP (1987). Survival of repeated frosts by the Queensland fruit fly, Dacus tryoni:
experiments in laboratory simulated climates with either step or ramp fluctuations of temperature.
Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata. 45: 9-16.

Meats A, Edgerton JE, 2008. Short- and long-range dispersal of the Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera
tryoni and its relevance to invasive potential, sterile insect technique and surveillance trapping.
Australian
Journal
of
Experimental
Agriculture,
48(9):1237-1245.
http://www.publish.csiro.au/nid/72.htm
Meats, A.; Fitt, G.P. (1987) Survival of repeated frosts by the Queensland fruit fly, Dacus tryoni:
experiments in laboratory simulated climates with either step or ramp fluctuations of temperature.
Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 45, 9-16.
Sutherst RW, Collyer BS, Yonow T, 2000. The vulnerability of Australian horticulture to the Queensland
fruit fly, Bactrocera (Dacus) tryoni, under climate change. Australian Journal of Agricultural
Research, 51(4): 467-480.
USDA
United
States
Department
of
Agriculture
Treatment
Manual.
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/import_export/plants/manuals/ports/downloads/treatment.pdf
[accessed on 2021-04-23]
Vijaysegaran S, 1997. Fruit fly research and development in tropical Asia. ACIAR Proceedings Series,
76: 21-29.
White IM, Elson-Harris MM, 1994. Fruit Flies of Economic Significance. Their Identification and
Bionomics. Wallingford, UK: CAB International.
Yonow T, Zalucki MP, Sutherst RW, Dominiak BC, Maywald GF, Maelzer DA & Kriticos DJ (2004).
Modelling the population dynamics of the Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera (Dacus) tryoni: a
cohort-based approach incorporating the effects of weather. Ecological Modelling. 173: 9-30.

7.3.A.6.
South African citrus thrips, Scirtothrips aurantii

7.3.A.6.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: South African citrus thrips
Scientific name: Scirtothrips aurantii
Synonyms: Scirtothrips acaciae Moulton

Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Hexapoda
Class: Insecta
Order: Thysanoptera
Family: Thripidae
Genus: Scirtothrips
Species: Scirtothrips aurantii

EPPO Code: SCITAU. This pest has been included in EPPO A1 list: No. 221
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [EPPO, 2021]
7.3.A.6.2. Biology
Scirtothrips females insert their eggs into young and soft tissues of leaves, stems and fruit using
their distinctive saw-like ovipositor. After having hatched these thrips go through four
developmental stages (EPPO, 2005; CABI, 2017): two actively feeding immature instars (first
and second instar larva), two non-feeding immature instars (prepupa and pupa) and the feeding

adults. Both, adults and larvae feed on epidermal and occasionally even palisade cells of young
leaves or on young fruit often still concealed under the calyx (Milne and Manicom, 1978); they
do not feed on mature leaves. Upon completion of the second instar, larvae seek refuge, usually
on the ground in leaf litter, where they pupate. Very occasionally pupae can be found beneath
the calyx of fruits, however, as only the youngest fruits are attacked S. aurantii rarely occur on
harvested fruits. Breeding is almost continuous, with no diapause, although development is
slower in colder seasons due to cooler weather and diminishing food supply. The life cycle of S.
aurantii can be completed within 18 days in summer to 44 days in winter, respectively (Gilbert
and Bedford, 1998). In South Africa, more than nine generations per year are known to occur in
citrus and mangoes. Adults are probably dispersed downwind, but observations in South Africa
have suggested that early-season infestations in citrus orchards develop mainly from thrips that
have overwintered within each orchard, rather than from adults flying in from wild plants
(Gilbert and Samways, 2018). Later in the season (November and December), wild hosts
probably assume greater importance as a source of the pest. Citrus trees close to windbreaks
made of host plants (e.g. Grevillea trees which harbour S. aurantii) had more severe fruit scarring
than citrus trees close to non-host windbreaks (e.g. Pinus or Casuarina trees) (Grout and
Richards, 1990a; Dubois and Quilici, 1999).

7.3.A.6.3. Hosts
Although usually considered to be associated with Citrus, especially oranges (C. sinensis) in
southern Africa, S. aurantii is highly polyphagous and has been found on more than 70 plant
species in a wide range of different plant families. Its native hosts are probably Acacia and
Combretum trees, but it has also been found on a range of crops that are not only botanically
unrelated but differ widely in form, including amaranth, asparagus, banana, cashew, castor bean,
cotton, mango, peanut, and grapevine (Freebairn, 2008). However, the occurrence of adults
feeding on a plant does not necessarily constitute this plant as a true host (EFSA, 2018). Reports
based on records of adults alone do not provide conclusive evidence of the suitability of a plant,
to allow reproduction and sustain development of all life stages of S. aurantii. The following
host list provides plant species where both larvae and adults of S. aurantii have been found,
suggesting that they are true hosts.
Host list: Acacia, Arachis hypogaea, Asparagus, Bauhinia galpinii, Caesalpinia pulcherrima,
Calliandra calothyrsus , Citroncirus, Citrus latifolia, Citrus limon, Citrus paradisi, Citrus
reticulata, Citrus sinensis, Citrus trifoliata, Citrus , Combretum, Dichrostachys cinerea,
Diospyros kaki, Fortunella, Fragaria x ananassa, Gloriosa superba, Gossypium, Grevillea
robusta, Kalanchoe blossfeldiana, Kalanchoe delagoensis, Kalanchoe pinnata, Leucaena
leucocephala, Macadamia integrifolia, Mangifera indica, Mucuna coriacea subsp. irritans,
Musa x paradisiaca, Persea americana, Pithecellobium dulce, Punica granatum, Ricinus
communis, Rubus idaeus, Rubus, Senegalia polyacantha subsp. campylacantha, Vaccinium,
Vachellia karroo, Vitis vinifera, x Citrofortunella microcarpa.

7.3.A.6.4. Distribution

S. aurantii is native to Africa
EPPO Region: Portugal (mainland), Spain (mainland)
Africa: Angola, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Reunion, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe
Asia: Yemen
Oceania: Australia (New South Wales, Queensland)

7.3.A.6.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that S. aurantii -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [EPPO, 2021]
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of many
cultivated plants including most characteristically fruits: Citrus limon (Lemon); Citrus
paradisi (Grapefruit), Citrus reticulata (Mandarin Orange), Citrus sinensis (Sweet Orange),
Citrus medica (Zara lebu) are also infested.
• It is a serious pest of Australia, Egypt, South Africa from where a large number of fruits are
imported to Bangladesh.
• S. aurantii is a very polyphagous species. It could be introduced with plants for planting, cut
flowers or cut foliage. Its occurrence in citrus-growing areas with a subtropical or
Mediterranean climate suggests that S. aurantii could probably establish on citrus in Southern
Europe and the Mediterranean area. It is a damaging pest on citrus and requires specific
control that may challenge current IPM practices. Mango and avocado are also cultivated in
the EPPO region and may be at risk if S. aurantii was introduced.
• S. aurantii is mainly present in Africa, where it is a damaging pest of citrus, requiring
insecticide treatments. Its importance has also increased on mangoes, where insecticide
treatments are applied, and concerns have also been raised for banana and tea. Since its
present range includes areas with tropical, subtropical and Mediterranean climates, any such
area elsewhere in the world, growing its four main hosts, could be at risk.
• S. aurantii is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.6.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.6.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• This pest has been established in many countries including Australia, Spain,
Portugal, Egypt, South Africa (EPPO 2023). A huge amount of citrus was
imported in Bangladesh from Australia, Egypt, South Africa, etc. (DAE,
2022). In Australia, Egypt and South Africa S. aurantii is very common pest.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• Scirtothrips females insert their eggs into young and soft tissues of leaves,
stems and fruit using their distinctive saw-like ovipositor. Both, adults and
larvae feed on epidermal and occasionally even palisade cells of young
leaves or on young fruit often still concealed under the calyx (Milne and
Manicom, 1978). The life cycle of S. aurantii can be completed within 18
days in summer to 44 days in winter, respectively (Gilbert and Bedford,
1998). This period of time taken for shipment through transportation
pathways from the above-mentioned exporting countries to Bangladesh is
sufficient enough for survival of this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in

Yes
and
High

wrapping (wooden boxes) and stored in normal conditions. So, the pests
could survive during transporting process.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes,
• The potential of S. aurantii for natural spread is relatively limited. In
international trade, S. aurantii could be carried on plants for planting (on
young leaves or in the growing medium attached) as well as on cut flowers
or cut foliage, but in fact interceptions are relatively rare (EFSA, 2018;
Vierbergen et al., 2010). Nevertheless, it has been introduced to Australia
and more recently to Spain. Unlike other Thysanoptera, Scirtothrips sp.
seem to require access to soft green tissues, except when pupating in leaf
litter and soil. So only seedlings, green fruits or cuttings with young
growing leaf buds are liable to carry these pests. EFSA (2018) considers
that S. aurantii is unlikely to be associated with mature fruit as they do not
feed or oviposit on mature fruit.
• There is no direct evidence that S. aurantii has been dispersed beyond its
natural range by human activity (except possibly to African islands such as
Cape Verde, Mauritius and Réunion). S. aurantii is not likely to be
transported on traded fruit, which limits the risk of introduction. It could
however, be carried on plants for planting.S. aurantii has been declared to
be a quarantine pest for the following Regional Plant Protection
Organizations: APPPC, EPPO, OIRSA, PPPO.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• S. aurantii is highly polyphagous and has been found on more than 70 plant
species in a wide range of different plant families. Its native hosts are
probably Acacia and Combretum trees, but it has also been found on a range
of crops that are not only botanically unrelated but differ widely in form,
including citrus, amaranth, asparagus, banana, cashew, castor bean,
cotton, mango, peanut, and grapevine (Freebairn, 2008). However, the
occurrence of adults feeding on a plant does not necessarily constitute this
plant as a true host (EFSA, 2018).
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established
Low

7.3.A.6.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.6.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.

• It is an important pest of many cultivated plants including most
characteristically fruits: Citrus, Citrus limon (lemon), Citrus medica (Zara)
Citrus sinensis (sweet orange), Camellia sinensis (tea), Gossypium (cotton),
mangoes (Mangifera indica), etc. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and
plant material are imported from Australia, South Africa and Egypt; there is
possibility to establish the pest in Bangladesh.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits, vegetables and other crops for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• At least ten species of Scirtothrips are known as pests of various crops in
different parts of the tropics, but most of them have restricted geographic
ranges and breed on specific tropical host plants, such as S. kenyensis which
damages tea and coffee in Eastern Africa (Moritz et al., 2013), or S. manihoti
which causes serious leaf distortion of cassava in Central and South America
(Mound and zur Strassen, 2001). Scirtothrips species are particularly
associated with plants that grow in warm, dry conditions; they are usually
more abundant on terminal shoots rather than within the canopy of a tree.
Along with S. citri and S. dorsalis, S. aurantii is, as a pest of citrus, one of
the most important Scirtothrips sp. for international agriculture.
• In South Africa and Zimbabwe, S. aurantii causes reduction in citrus yields
due to serious damage to young leaves and reduces the proportion of export
quality fruits. It is a most serious pest at low altitudes (Hill, 1983). It is not
generally regarded as harmful to citrus crops further north in Africa, although
this might be due to less intensive cultivation practices. Damage to tea plants
has been reported from plantations in Malawi (Rattan, 1992), and S. aurantii
is the primary cause of banana fruit spotting in Yemen (Nasseh and Mughni,
1990). S. aurantii is also considered as a pest in mango (Grové et al., 2000a)
and avocado (Bara and Laing, 2019).
• In Australia, S. aurantii is not considered as a crop pest (Garms et al., 2013;
Rafter et al., 2013) as it is mainly recorded on the weed Bryophyllum
delagoense.
c. Environmental Impact
• S. aurantii is a very polyphagous species. It could be introduced with plants
for planting, cut flowers or cut foliage. Its occurrence in citrus-growing areas
with a subtropical or Mediterranean climate suggests that S. aurantii could
probably establish on citrus in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean area.
It is a damaging pest on citrus and requires specific control that may
challenge current IPM practices.
• Managing this pathogen might require the use of insecticides or other
chemical control measures. These can have broader environmental impacts,
such as effects on non-target organisms in the ecosystem or potential
contamination of water resources.
• The pest might affect not only cultivated citrus but also wild species,
potentially impacting local biodiversity.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.6.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.6.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.6.9. Risk Management Measures

• Importation of Citrus plants for planting is prohibited or restricted in many EPPO
countries to prevent introduction of important pests. However, S. aurantii could be
introduced with other plant species, as it is very polyphagous, and adults may be found
on plants on which they may not complete their full life cycle. To prevent introduction
of the pest, plants for planting should either be dormant (i.e., without leaves and fruit)
with no growing medium attached or come from a pest-free area or a pest-free place of
production. An insecticide treatment before shipping may also be an option.
• Measures for cut flowers/foliage may not be justified as the risk of transfer to host plants
at destination is limited.
7.3.A.6.10. References
Bara GT, Laing MD (2019) Determination of the natural host status of avocado fruit to pestiferous thrips
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. African Entomology 27(1), 245-253
https://doi.org/10.4001/003.027.0245
CABI (2017) CABI Datasheet report for Scirtothrips aurantii (South African citrus thrips). Available at:
https://www.cabi.org/isc/datasheet/49061
Dubois B, Quilici S (1999) Etude préliminaire de l’évolution des populations de Scirtothrips aurantii
Faure
sur
vigne
à
l’île
de
la
Réunion.
Fruits
54(1),
67-78.
Available
at:
https://revues.cirad.fr/index.php/fruits/article/view/35648
EFSA PLH Panel (EFSA Panel on Plant Health) Jeger M, Bragard C, Caffier D, Candresse T,
Chatzivassiliou E, Dehnen-Schmutz K, Gilioli G, Gregoire J-C, Jaques Miret JA, Navarro MN,
Niere B, Parnell S, Potting R, Rafoss T, Rossi V, Urek G, Van Bruggen A, Van der Werf W,
West J, Winter S, Gardi C, MacLeod A (2018) Scientific Opinion on the pest categorisation of
Scirtothrips aurantii. EFSA Journal 16(3), 5188, 21 pp. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5188
EPPO (2005) Diagnostics. Scirtothrips aurantii, Scirtothrips citri, Scirtothrips dorsalis. EPPO Standard
PM 7/56 (1). EPPO Bulletin 35(2), 353-356. Available from https://gd.eppo.int/standards/PM7/
Freebairn C (2008) South African citrus thrips in Australia – identity, pest status and control. Final
Report: CT03022, Horticultural Australia Ltd., 202 pp.
Garms BW, Mound LA, Schellhorn NA (2013) Polyphagy in the Australian population of South African
citrus thrips (Scirtothrips aurantii Faure). Australian Journal of Entomology 52, 282-289.
Gilbert MJ, Bedford ECG (1998) Citrus thrips. Scirtothrips aurantii Faure. In: Citrus pests in the Republic
of South Africa, 2nd revised edition (Ed. by Bedford ECG, van den Berg MA, de Villiers EA).
Institute for Tropical and Subtropical Crops, Nelspruit, South Africa, pp. 164-170.

Gilbert MJ, Samways MJ (2018) Mature larval dispersal and adult emergence of the economically
significant pest, Scirtothrips aurantii Faure (Thysanoptera: Thripidae), in commercial citrus.
Journal of Insect Science 18(2), 32. https://doi.org/10.1093/jisesa/iey028
Grout TG, Richards GI (1990a) The influence of windbreak species on citrus thrips (Thysanoptera:
Thripidae) populations and their damage to South African citrus orchards. Journal of the
Entomological Society of Southern Africa 53, 151-157.
Grové T, Giliomee JH, Pringle KL (2000a) Seasonal abundance of different stages of the citrus thrips,
Scirtothrips aurantii, on two mango cultivars in South Africa. Phytoparasitica 28, 43-53.
Hill DS (1983) Agricultural insect pests of the tropics and their control. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK. 758pp.
Milne DL, Manicom BQ (1978) Feeding apparatus of the South African citrus thrips Scirtothrips aurantii
Faure. Citrus and Subtropical Fruit Journal 535, 6-11.
Moritz G, Brandt S, Triapitsyn S, Subramanian S (2013) Identification and information tools for pest
thrips in East Africa. CBIT Publishing, Queensland. Available at: http://thripsnet.zoologie.unihalle.de/key-server-neu/data/03030c05-030b-4107-880b-
0a0a0702060d/media/Html/index.html
Mound LA, zur Strassen R (2001) The genus Scirtothrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in Mexico: a critique
of the review by Johansen & Mojica-Guzmán (1998). Folia Entomológica Mexicana 40, 133-
Nasseh OM, Mughni AAA (1990) Efficacy of chemical and natural insecticides for suppression of
Scirtothrips aurantii (Faure) (Thripidae - Thysanoptera) causing banana fruit spotting disease in
the Yemen Arab Republic. In: Proceedings, Integrated Pest Management in Tropical and
Subtropical
Cropping
Systems,
Frankfurt,
1990,
pp.
749-756.
Deutsche
Landwirtschaftsgesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Rafter MA, Walter GH (2013) Mate recognition in the South African citrus thrips Scirtothrips aurantii
(Faure) and cross-mating tests with populations from Australia and South Africa. Journal of
Insect Behaviour 26, 780-795. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10905-013-9391-7
Rattan PS (1992) Thrips (Scirtothrips aurantii), synthetic pyrethroid insecticides and alternatives.
Quarterly Newsletter, Tea Research Foundation of Central Africa 106, 9-11.
Vierbergen G, Kucharczyk H, Kirk WDJ (2010) A key to the second instar larvae of the Thripidae of the
Western Palaearctic region (Thysanoptera). Tijdschrift voor Entomologie 153(1), 99-160.
https://doi.org/10.1163/22119434-900000294

7.3.A.7.
California citrus thrips, Scirtothrips citri

7.3.A.7.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: California citrus thrips
Scientific name: Scirtothrips citri (Moulton, 1909)
Synonyms: Euthrips citri Moulton, 1909
Scirtothrips clivicola Hood, 1957
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Hexapoda
Class: Insecta
Order: Thysanoptera
Family: Thripidae
Genus: Scirtothrips
Species: Scirtothrips citri

EPPO Code: SCITCI. This pest has been included in EPPO A1 list: No. 222
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [ EPPO, 2022]
7.3.A.7.2. Biology
Scirtothrips citri has a short life cycle and high fecundity. Each adult female lays about 25 eggs
embedded in the new leaf tissue or young fruit. Scirtothrips have four developmental stages: two
actively feeding immature instars (first and second instar larva), two non-feeding immature
instars (prepupa and pupa) and the feeding adults. S. citri adults can live as long as 25-30 days
under warm conditions and could live longer under cooler conditions, but do not develop below
14°C. Citrus thrips can produce 8-12 generations per year. In California, overwintering eggs
from the previous season hatch in March as the new leaf flush begins (Grafton-Cardwell et al.,
2020). Larvae feed actively on tender leaves and fruit, especially under the sepals of young fruit.
The pre-pupal and pupal phase is spent in cracks in the bark of trees or on the ground. The
lifecycle can be completed in 2-3 weeks during summer.

7.3.A.7.3. Hosts
Scirtothrips citri (Moulton), also commonly known as ‘Citrus thrips’ but not to be confused with
‘South African citrus thrips’ (Scirtothrips aurantii Faure) is primarily a pest of Citrus and
blueberries. S. citri has a broad host range: overall, S. citri has been found on over 50 plant
species. However, many are likely to not be hosts on which the life cycle can be completed. Its
native host plant is possibly one or more species of Quercus (Bailey, 1964), or more likely Rhus
laurina (Morse, 1995). The main hosts of interest are fruit trees: Adenostoma fasciculatum,
Carya illinoinensis, Citroncirus, Citrus aurantiifolia, Citrus clementina, Citrus limon, Citrus
medica, Citrus paradisi, Citrus reticulata, Citrus sinensis, Citrus trifoliata, Citrus unshiu,
Citrus, Coffea arabica, Dahlia imperialis, Fortunella, Gossypium hirsutum, Larrea tridentata,
Magnolia tripetala, Magnolia, Mangifera indica, Medicago sativa, Myrtus, Phoenix dactylifera,
Prosopis, Quercus, Rhizophora mangle, Rhus laurina, Rosa, Salix, Schinus molle, Simmondsia
chinensis, Umbellularia californica, Vaccinium corymbosum, Vaccinium hybrids, Vitis vinifera,
x Citrofortunella microcarpa

7.3.A.7.4. Distribution

Scirtothrips citri is found in warm climates that are ranging from tropical to arid conditions. It
is known to be found in North America in the USA and Mexico. There are some uncertainties
on the distribution outside of North America.
EPPO region: Israel.
North America: Mexico, USA (EPPO, 2022)).
Asia: China, India, Iran, Thailand (Unreliable present)

7.3.A.7.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that S. citri -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh [EPPO, 2022]
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of many
cultivated plants including most characteristically fruits: Citrus limon (Lemon); Citrus
medica (Zara), Citrus paradisi (Grapefruit), Citrus reticulata (Mandarin Orange), Citrus
sinensis (Sweet Orange), Citrus unshiu (Satsuma Orange), Coffea arabica (Arabica Coffee),

Gossypium hirsutum (Upland Cotton), Mangifera indica (Mango), Medicago sativa
(Alfalfa), Phoenix dactylifera (Date Palm), Rosa (Rose), etc.
• It is a serious pest of USA from where a large number of fruits including citrus are imported
to Bangladesh.
• S. citri is a very polyphagous species. It could be introduced with host plants for planting,
cut foliage or cut flowers. The occurrence of S. citri in citrus-growing areas with a subtropical
or Mediterranean climate suggests that it could probably establish on citrus in Southern
Europe and the Mediterranean area. S. citri is a damaging pest of citrus and blueberry and
requires specific control that may challenge current IPM practices.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits. It has capability to cause direct
and indirect economic and ecological damage to many valuable cultivated crops and fruits.
• S. citri is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.7.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.7.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• This pest has been established in many North American and European
countries.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• S. citri adults can live as long as 25-30 days under warm conditions and
could live longer under cooler conditions, but do not develop below 14°C.
This period of time taken for shipment through transportation pathways
from the above-mentioned exporting countries to Bangladesh is sufficient
enough for survival of this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in wrapping
(wooden boxes) and stored in normal conditions. So, the pests could survive
during transporting process.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes,
• Up to December 2017, there is one record of an EU interception of S. citri
in the Europhyt database. It relates to an interception in 2003 in the UK on
a consignment of Festuca pratensis seeds (plants for planting not yet
planted) coming from Thailand. This is considered an unusual interception
given that S. citri feeds on actively growing leaf and fruit tissues rather than
grass seed. More likely pathways for S. citri would be:
o plants for planting, on either young leaves or fruit (all stages), or in
the associated soil/litter (prepupae and pupae),
o cut flowers with young leaves or fruit (all stages),
Yes
and
High

o fruit, most likely on young fruit (all developmental stages). Very
unlikely on mature commercial fruit.
• Current EU legislation prohibits the import of plants of Citrus, Fortunella,
Poncirus and their hybrids, other than fruit and seeds from third countries.
Therefore, pathways 1 and 2 can be considered as closed for citrus. For
other hosts, the number of plant species that could provide a pathway via
plants for planting or cut flowers is uncertain because of the lack of sound
data supporting the status of plants reported as hosts (Morse, 1995; CABI,
• Nevertheless, S. citri is potentially highly polyphagous and the current
measures aimed at the import of plants for planting in a dormant stage (no
young foliage or fruits present) with no soil/growing medium/debris
attached decreases the likelihood of S. citri being carried with imports of
host plants.
• The third pathway is considered unlikely as S. citri does not feed on mature
commercial fruit. Eurostat trade data do not discriminate between species
of plants for planting. Fortunately, the Netherlands NPPO kindly provided
EFSA with detailed trade inspection data regarding plants for planting from
2012 to 2014. This information show that a number of genera reported to
be hosts of S. citri were imported into the EU as plants for planting from
China, Thailand and USA over the period 2012–2014, indicating that
potential pathways exist for the entry of S. citri.
• The potential for Scirtothrips spp. to spread naturally is relatively limited
(EPPO, 2017). Although S. citri adults actively fly they do not move long
distances between hosts (Moreno et al., 1984; UC, 1991). Long distance
international spread is most likely via trade in plants or plant parts in a
nondormant stage (i.e., with actively growing leaf flush and/or young fruit).
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• A range of plant species reported as hosts to S. citri occurs in the EU. For
example, cultivated fruit such as Citrus spp, Vitis sp. and Mangifera
indica, as well as on ornamental plants, e.g., Rosa spp., Phoenix spp., and
wild plants, e.g., Vaccinium sp., Quercus spp. and Abies spp. However,
from these plant species, S. citri has reached pest status only in highbush
blueberries (V. corymbosum) in California and in citrus in south-western
USA (UC, 1991; Haviland et al., 2009; Dreistadt et al., 2011) and Asia
(Bhagat et al., 1999; Sharma, 2007).
• The Koppen–Geiger classification of climatic regions (Peel et al., 2007) in
North America where S. citri occurs, includes regions that are also found in
Europe where citrus and Vaccinium are grown. We assume establishment
in these areas would be possible outdoors. Moreover, given the polyphagy
of this thrips, its establishment under protected cultivation might also
possible further north in Europe.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
Low

• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established

7.3.A.7.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.7.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is an important pest of many cultivated plants including most
characteristically fruits: Citrus limon (Lemon); Citrus medica (Zara), Citrus
paradisi (Grapefruit), Citrus reticulata (Mandarin Orange), Citrus sinensis
(Sweet Orange), Citrus unshiu (Satsuma Orange), Coffea arabica (Arabica
Coffee), Gossypium hirsutum (Upland Cotton), Mangifera indica (Mango),
Medicago sativa (Alfalfa), Phoenix dactylifera (Date Palm), Rosa (Rose), etc.
Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant material are imported from USA,
China, India there is possibility to establishthe pest in Bangladesh.
• If the pest establishes establish in Bangladesh, it will be a fairly serious pest
of several important fruits, vegetables and other crops for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• Scirtothrips citri feeding and oviposition in citrus does not reduce yields but
can produce unacceptable cosmetic damage which may affect the
marketability of fruit, at least for fresh consumption. The cosmetic damage
is caused by feeding which punctures plant tissues and drains the contents of
cells causing their cell walls to collapse (Lewis, (1973). Such damage in
citrus often results in a conspicuous ring of scarred tissue around the apex of
young fruits (Parker et al., 1995; Mound and Kibby, 1998).
• Oviposition damage (oviposition scars) on fruit may be a problem in early
harvested citrus fruit only. Most economic damage to fruits occurs from petal
fall until the fruit are about 4 cm in diameter. Damage is greatest on fruit on
the outside of the canopy (UC, 1991; EPPO, 2017).
• Damage in blueberry consists of curling and abnormal growth of new leaves,
as well as scarring of new twigs, which would lead to lower fruit set the
following year. However, fruit quality is not affected in this case (Haviland
et al., 2009; Haviland, 2014).
• The type of damage caused by S. citri in North America could be expected in
the EU.
c. Environmental Impact
• S. citri is a very polyphagous species. It could be introduced with plants for
planting, cut flowers or cut foliage. Its occurrence in citrus-growing areas
with a subtropical or Mediterranean climate suggests that S. citri could
probably establish on citrus in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean area.
It is a damaging pest on citrus and requires specific control that may challenge
current IPM practices.
• Managing this pathogen might require the use of insecticides or other
chemical control measures. These can have broader environmental impacts,

Yes
and
High

such as effects on non-target organisms in the ecosystem or potential
contamination of water resources.
• The pest might affect not only cultivated citrus but also wild species,
potentially impacting local biodiversity.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.7.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table-7.7.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.7.9. Risk Management Measures

• Importation of citrus plants for planting is prohibited or restricted in many EPPO
countries to prevent introduction of important pests. However, S. citri could be
introduced with other plant species, as it is very polyphagous, and adults may be found
on plants on which they may not complete their full life cycle. To prevent introduction
of the pest, plants for planting should either be dormant (i.e., without leaves) with no
growing medium attached or come from a pest-free area or a pest-free place of
production. An insecticide treatment before shipping may also be an option.
• Measures for cut flowers/foliage may not be justified as the risk of transfer to host plants
at destination is limited.
7.3.A.7.10. References
Bhagat KC, Nehru RK and Koul VK, 1999. Sap feeding pests of citrus in Jammu. Insect Environment,
5, 123. Available online: https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/20001107657
CABI, 2017. Scirtothrips citri (California citrus thrips) Datasheeet 49063, Crop Protection Compendium.
Last modified 11 October 2017. Available online: https://www.cabi.org/isc/datasheet/49063
Dreistadt SH, Phillips PA and O’Donnell CA, 2011. Pest notes: Thrips. UC ANR Publication 7429. IPM
Education and Publications, University of California Statewide IPM Program. Available online:
http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn7429.html
EPPO (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization), 2017. EPPO Global Database.
Available online: https://gd.eppo.int
Haviland DR, Rill SM and Morse JG, 2009. Southern highbush blueberries are a new host for Scirtothrips
citri (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in California. Florida Entomologist, 92, 147–149.

Haviland DR. 2014. University of California Pest Management Guidelines. Blueberry. Citrus thrips.
Available online: http://ipm.ucanr.edu/PMG/r57300111.html [Accessed: 13 December 2017]
Lewis T, 1973. Thrips - their biology, ecology and economic importance. Academic Press, London. 349
pp.
Moreno DS, Gregory WA and Tanigoshi LK, 1984. Flight response of Aphytis melinus (Hymenoptera:
Aphelinidae) and Scirtothrips citri (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) to trap color, size, and shape.
Environmental Entomology, 13, 935–940.
Morse JG, 1995. Prospects for IPM of citrus thrips in California. In: Parker BL, Skinner M and Lewis T
(eds.). Thrips biology and management, Proceedings of the 1993 International Conference on
Thysanoptera: Towards understanding thrips management. September 28–30 1993, Burlington,
Vermont. pp. 371–379.
Mound LA and Kibby G, 1998. Thysanoptera, an identification guide, 2nd Edition. CABI, Wallingford.
Parker BL, Skinner M and Lewis T (eds.)., 1995. Thrips biology and management, Proceedings of the
1993 International Conference on Thysanoptera: towards understanding thrips management.
September 28–30 1993, Burlington, Vermont. Plenum, London.
Peel MC, Finlayson BL and McMahon TA, 2007. Updated world map of the Koppen-Geiger climate
classification. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 11, 1633–1644.
Sharma DR, 2007. Activity and control of citrus thrips, Scirtothrips citri (Moulton) on kinnow.
Agricultural Research Journal, 44, 59–62.
UC (University of California), 1991. Integrated Pest Management for Citrus. 2nd Edition. University of
California. Statewide Integrated Pest Management Project. Division of Agriculture and Natural
Resources. Publication 3303. Oakland, CA (USA), 144 pp.

7.3.A.8.
Citrus rust mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora

7.3.A.8.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus rust mite
Scientific name: Phyllocoptruta oleivora (Ashmead)
Synonyms: Eriophyes oleivorus
Phyllocoptes oleivorus

Phyllocoptrata oleivorus
Typhlodromus oleivorus
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Chelicerata
Class: Arachnida
Family: Eriophyidae
Genus: Phyllocoptruta
Species: Phyllocoptruta oleivora

EPPO Code: PHYUOL.
7.3.A.8.2. Biology
The citrus rust mite is yellow, fusiform, dorsally flattened, and very little (approximately 0.15
mm long). Over the course of her 20-day existence, a female lays 20 to 30 eggs. The semitranslucent, smooth, spherical eggs are placed in clusters in divots on the ventral surfaces of
leaves and fruits. Nymphal development takes 2 to 11 days to finish after the egg period of 3

days. In the summer, the life cycle lasts 7 to 10 days, but it takes 14 days in the winter (Qureshi
and Stansly, 2019).
7.3.A.8.3. Hosts
Phyllocoptruta oleivora is found on all varieties of citrus (Rutaceae). It also feeds on other
rutaceous hosts such as tabog, Swinglea glutinosa (Blanco) Merr, and kumquats, Fortunella spp.
(Vacante and Gerson 2012).

7.3.A.8.4. Distribution

Phyllocoptruta oleivora is thought to have originated in Southeast Asia. It is a tropical species
present in all citrus growing areas of the world where humidity is high. Regions where the mite
represents a major pest of citrus include the Middle East (Georgia, Israel, and Turkey), South
Africa, Australia, USA, and southern Asia (Japan and China) (Tropea and Lillo 2018). In the
USA, Phyllocoptruta oleivora is found throughout Florida and on the Coastal Intermediate
region of California (Hoy 2011).
Africa: Egypt (EPPO 2022).
Asia: China, India, Thailand, Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam, Japan (EPPO 2022).
North America: USA, Mexico (EPPO 2022).
South America: Argentina, Brazil (EPPO 2022).
Oceania: Australia, New Zealand (EPPO 2022).
Europe: Italy (EPPO 2022).

7.3.A.8.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that P. oleivora -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO 2022).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus plants.
• It is a serious pest of China, India, Thailand, USA, Egypt, Australia and Brazil from where a
large number of citruses are imported to Bangladesh.
• The major risk is from the importation of infested plant parts by human.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. It has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• P. oleivora is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.8.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.8.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years?
- No
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– No
Yes
and
Moderate

• There is no data about the survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes
• P. oleivora can enter Bangladesh through citrus plant materials including
fruits and leaves. Although it exists in India, there is another natural route (by
wind) for people to enter Bangladesh from the surrounding nations.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• Citrus spp. is the main hosts of P. oleivora. Here the host plant is well
distributed in Bangladesh. So, there will be highly possibility to establish this
pathogen in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.A.8.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.8.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is a major pest of Citrus. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant
material are imported from Australia, China, India, USA, Egypt, Brazil,
there is possibility to establish the pest in Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• It can reduce size, weight and quality of fruit, juice content, and increase
fruit drop.
• In many other countries across the world, including Argentina, Australia,
China, Egypt, and the United States, P. oleivora has been identified as a
severe citrus pest. In fact, it is now present in the mostcitrus-growing
regions worldwide. Numerous studies have been conducted on infestation
and damage (Yang et al., 1994).
c. Environmental Impact
• Using of synthetic miticide to control P. oleivora is harmful for soil and
environment.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.8.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.8.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.8.9. Risk Management Measures

Successful natural enemies against P. oleivora include Amblyseius victoriensis, Hirsutella
thompsonii, Tydeus sp., Agistemus exsertus, etc. (CABI, 2021). To avoid conditions of water
stress and the ensuing flare-up, water wisely, especially during the summer. Spray 1000–1500
litres of water per hectare with monocrotophos 36 SL 1.5 L or dicofol 18.5 EC 1.0 L.
7.3.A.8.10. References
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
EPPO, 2022. EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Hoy MA. 2011. Agricultural Acarology: Introduction to Integrated Mite Management. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida, 430.
Qureshi, J.A. and Stansly, P.A. (2019). Rust mites, spider mites, and other phytophagous mites. ENY-
603. https://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/cg002. Accessed 8 Nov 2019.
Tropea, G.G. and Lillo, D.E. (2018). Geographic distribution of Phyllocoptruta oleivora in the
Mediterranean Basin, with particular emphasis on Italy. Systematic and Applied Acarology 23:
1021-1023.
Vacante, V. and Gerson, U. (2012). Acari, pp. 88–108. In: Vacante V, and Gerson U. Integrated control
of citrus pests in the Mediterranean region. Bentham Science Publishers, Sharjah, UAE.
Yang, Y., Allen, J.C., Knapp, J.L. and Stansly, P.A. (1994). Citrus rust mite (Acari: Eriophyidae) damage
effects on 'Hamlin' orange fruit growth and drop. Environmental Entomology, 23(2):244-247.

7.3.A.9.
Citrus bud mite, Aceria sheldoni

7.3.A.9.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus bud mite
Scientific name: Aceria sheldoni (Ashmead)
Synonyms: Eriophyes sheldoni
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Chelicerata
Class: Arachnida
Family: Eriophyidae
Genus: Aceria
Species: Aceria sheldoni
EPPO Code: ACEISH. It is listed as A1 pest in Bahrain, Uzbekistan, Georgia and Canada in
2003, 2008, 2018 and 1992, respectively. Egypt listed this pest as A2 listed pest in 2018.
7.3.A.9.2. Biology
The citrus bud mite is a tiny, yellowish, or pinkish insect that can grow up to 0.16 mm in length.
The 50 eggs that a female can lay will hatch in 2 to 5 days. Although it is active all year round,
each generation can last up to 10 days in the summer and up to 20 days in the winter. Before
attaining adulthood, the animal goes through four pre-imaginal instars.
7.3.A.9.3. Hosts
Citrus spp. is the main hosts of A. sheldoni (EPPO, 2022).

7.3.A.9.4. Distribution

Africa: Egypt, South Africa (EPPO 2022).
Asia: India, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia (EPPO 2022).
North America: USA (EPPO 2022).
South America: Argentina, Brazil (EPPO 2022).
Oceania: Australia, New Zealand (EPPO 2022).
Europe: Italy, Greece, Spain (EPPO 2022).

7.3.A.9.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that A. sheldoni -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO 2022).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus plants.
• It is a serious pest of India, USA, Egypt, South Africa,Australia and Brazil from where large
number of citruses are imported to Bangladesh.
• The major risk is from the importation of infested plant parts by human.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. It has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• A. sheldoni is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.9.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.9.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -
No
Yes
and

b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage, and transfer?
– No
• There is no data about the survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer. Mostly it can dispersal through wind (CABI, 2021).
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes
• A. sheldoni can be entered into Bangladesh through the fruits and plant parts
of infected citrus. Another pathway is natural (by wind) to enter Bangladesh.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• Citrus spp. is the main hosts of A. sheldoni. Here the host plant is well
distributed in Bangladesh. So, there will be highly possibility to establish this
pathogen in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.A.9.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.9.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is a major pest of Citrus. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant
material are imported from Australia, China, South Africa, USA, Egypt,
Brazil, there is possibility to establish the pest in Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• It can reduce size, weight and quality of fruit, juice content, and increase
fruit drop (CABI, 2021).

c. Environmental Impact
• Using of synthetic miticide to control A. sheldoni is harmful for soil and
environment.
Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.9.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.9.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.A.9.9. Risk Management Measures

Narrow-range oil is applied annually to control citrus bud mite numbers (Hare et al., 1999).
Numerous predatory mites have been linked to the citrus bud mite, but because they are shielded
inside the buds, none seem to have an impact on the pest's populations or harm.

7.3.A.9.10. References
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Hare, J.D., Rakha, M. and Phillips, P.A. (1990). Citrus Bud Mite (Acari: Eriophyidae): an Economic Pest
of California Lemons? Journal of Economic Entomology, Volume 92, Issue 3, 1 June 1999, Pages
663–675.

7.3.A.10.
Lewis spider mite, Eotetranychus lewisi

7.3.A.10.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Lewis spider mite
Scientific name: Eotetranychus lewisi (McGregor)
Synonyms: Tetranychus lewisi (McGregor)
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Chelicerata
Order: Acarida
Class: Arachnida
Family: Tetranychidae
Genus: Eotetranychus
Species: Eotetranychus lewisi

EPPO Code: EOTELE. EPPO A1 list no. 205 and EU Annex designation II/A1.

7.3.A.10.2. Biology
The biology and life table of E. lewisi were assessed (19°C, 45% R.H., and 12:12 L.D.) under
laboratory circumstances. Between 16.24 and 16.56 days, the mean immature phase (from egg
to adult) duration did not significantly differ between the Blanco, Abridor and Tejón cultivars
(Miño et al., 2022).
E. lewisi has a five-stage life cycle, similar to other tetranychid species: egg, larva, protonymph,
deutonymph, and adult. Citrus mites lay their eggs in depressions on the fruit's surface and feed
on the growing fruit; they rarely harm the leaves. According to estimates using the Lactin and
linear models, E. lewisi's lower development temperature threshold from egg to adult is 8.3 or
9.0°C, respectively. The same authors state that 28.2°C is the upper development threshold.
Deutonymphs are the stage that can withstand cold temperatures the best, with estimated
thresholds of 2.5 or 3.4°C, respectively. The protonymph stage is the most heat-tolerant, with a
higher growth threshold of 31.5°C. On poinsettia leaves, development from egg to adult takes
19 days at 16°C and falls linearly with temperature to at least eight days at 26°C. The larval,
protonymphal, and deutonymphal stages persisted for 1.8, 1.4, and 2.3 days, respectively, at
26°C, while egg hatching took an average of 2.5 days. The time between egg deposition and
female emergence when E. lewisi was raised on delicate lemon leaves at temperatures ranging
from 17 to 23°C was twelve days. The average time between each step was six days for egg
incubation, two days for the larval stage, two days for the protonymph stage, and a further two
days for the deutonymph stage. Male development was two days shorter than female
development. According to Ahmed et al. (2014), the male citrus tree's life cycle from egg to
adult lasts an average of 12 days, whereas the female's cycle lasts 14.5 days.
7.3.A.10.3. Hosts
About 69 herbaceous and woody plant species from 26 distinct families of plants have been
found to harbour E. lewisi. Castor oil plant, poinsettia, strawberry, cotton, orange, fig, lemon,
papaya, olive, peach, and vine are cultivated plants that could serve as hosts. Weeds like
nightshade and several tree species, like acacias, pines, and aspens, are examples of wild hosts.

7.3.A.10.4. Distribution

Africa: South Africa (Vacante, 2010).
Asia: Iran, Japan, Philippines (Beyzavi et al., 2013).
North America: Mexico, USA (Baker and Tuttle, 1994).

7.3.A.10.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that E. lewisi -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO, 2022).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus plants.
And among the alternative hosts of E. lewisi cotton, strawberry, orange, papaya, olive, peach
etc. are also well distributed in Bangladesh.
• It is a serious pest of South Africa and USA from where large number of citruses are imported
to Bangladesh.
• The major risk is from the importation of infested plant parts by human.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. It has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• E. lewisi is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.A.10.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.3.A.10.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -
No
• There was no data about this.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– Yes
• Mite can survive up to about 19 days under the calyx of fruit at the time of
transportation, storage and transfer.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes
• E. lewisi can be entered into Bangladesh through the fruits and plant parts of
infected citrus. Another pathway is natural (by wind) to enter into
Bangladesh.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• Citrus spp. is the main hosts of E. lewisi. Here the host plant is well
distributed in Bangladesh. So, there will be highly possibility to establish this
pathogen in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
Yes
and
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.A.10.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.10.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• It is a major pest of Citrus. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant
material are imported from South Africa and USA, there is possibility to
establish the pest in Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• It can reduce size, weight and quality of fruit, juice content, and increase
fruit drop (CABI, 2021).
c. Environmental Impact
• Using of synthetic miticide to control E. lewisi is harmful for soil and
environment.
Yes
and
Moderate

• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.A.10.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.10.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – Moderate
7.3.A.10.9. Risk Management Measures

Citrus bud mite populations are controlled with yearly applications of narrow-range oil (Hare et
al., 1999). Numerous predatory mites have been linked to the citrus bud mite, but because they
are shielded inside the buds, none seem to have an impact on the pest's populations or harm.
Immersion in hot water is helpful against E. lewisi.
7.3.A.10.10. References
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T. and Ahmed, S. (2014). Pest Risk Analysis (PRA) of
Citrus under Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project (SPCB), DAE,
Strengthening Phytosanitary Capacity in Bangladesh Project, Department of Agricultural
Extension, Kharmarbhari, Farmgate, Dhaka-1215.
Baker, E.W. and Tuttle, D.M. (1994). In: A guide to the spider mites (Tetranychidae) of the United States,
pp. 171-172. Indira Publishing House, West Bloomfield, USA.
Beyzavi, G., Ueckermann, E.A., Faraji, F. and Ostovan, H. (2013). A catalog of Iranian prostigmatic
mites of superfamilies Raphignathoidea & Tetranychoidea (Acari). Persian Journal of Acarology,
2: 389-474.
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Hare, J.D., Rakha, M. and Phillips, P.A. (1990). Citrus Bud Mite (Acari: Eriophyidae): an Economic Pest
of California Lemons? Journal of Economic Entomology, Volume 92, Issue 3, 1 June 1999, Pages
663–675.
Miño, C., Santana, R., León, O., Colmenárez, Y., Villa-Murillo, A. and Vásquez, C. (2022). Biology and
life table of Eotetranychus lewisi (Acari: Tetranycidae) on Prunus persica cultivars from the
Ecuadorian Andean region, International Journal of Acarology, 48:3, 275-278, DOI:
10.1080/01647954.2022.2060305
Vacante, V. (2010). Review of the phytophagous mites collected on citrus in the world. Acarologia 50(2),
221-241.

7.3.B. DISEASE CAUSING PATHOGEN: BACTERIA
7.3.B.11.
Citrus variegated chlorosis, Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca

7.3.B.11.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus variegated chlorosis
Scientific name: Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca

Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Bacteria
Phylum: Proteobactria
Class: Gammaproteobacteria
Order: Xanthomonadales
Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Genus: Xylella
Species: Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca
EPPO Code: XYLEFP, Listed in EPPO A2 list and pest number is 166.
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [EPPO 2022]
7.3.B.11.2. Biology
A rod-shaped, xylem-limited, fastidious Gram-negative bacteria with rippling cell walls is
known as X. fastidiosa. It is 0.1-0.5 1–5 m in size, strictly aerobic (microaerophilic), nonflagellate, and does not produce spores. In scanning and electron microscopy, thread-like strands
(fimbriae) adhering to the polar ends of bacterial cells can be seen. These most likely play a role
in bacterial adhesion and 'twitching' movement (Meng et al., 2005).
7.3.B.11.3. Hosts
The current list of host plant species for X. fastidiosa includes 359 plant species (including
hybrids) from 204 genera and 75 different botanical families, according to the European Food
Safety Authority (2016).
According to Coletta-Filho et al. (2016), the main hosts are grapevine, almonds, lucerne,
blackberries, peaches, plums, apricots, citrus, peaches, coffee, oak, elm, plane, mulberry, and
olives.
The alternate hosts for the X. fastidiosa pathogen include maple, silk tree, pepper vine, wild oat,
quick grass, bermuda grass, crab grass, Japanese millet, wild strawberry, ivy, and daylilies,
among others (Olmo et al., 2017).

7.3.B.11.4. Distribution

North America: Costa Rica, USA (EPPO 2022).
South America: Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador (Tolocka et al., 2017).
Europe: France, Italy, Spain (EPPO 2022).

7.3.B.11.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO, 2022).

• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus,
peach, mulberry, blackberry and olive.
• It is not found at the countries from where large number of citruses are imported to
Bangladesh.
• The major risk is from the importation of fruit containing hyphae/spores, either as part of
cargo, or through the smuggling of fruit in airline passenger baggage or mail.
• It cannot establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits. But it has capability to cause
direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a
potential hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.B.11.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.11.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -

Yes
• In 2013, X. fastidiosa was discovered in Europe and seriously harmed Italian
Puglian olive orchards. It was also found in a great deal of other host plants,
mostly ornamentals. The bacterium was discovered in decorative plants on
the island of Corsica in 2015. The X. fastidiosa subspecies that was found in
France (subsp. multiplex) differed from that found in Italy (clustered in a
clade that was most closely related to subsp. pauca) (Elbeaino et al., 2014a).
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– No
• On a local scale, X. fastidiosa is disseminated by its vectors. Additionally,
vectors may be transported across international borders on grapevine, peach,
or other plant fruits or plants. When grapefruit clusters were tested as a source
of acquisition for feeding vectors, no transmission by an effective vector
occurred (Purcell and Saunders, 1995).
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - No
• Bangladesh does not import any plant materials from the countries where X.
fastidiosa subsp. pauca present.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• Citrus spp. is the main hosts of X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca. Where the host
plant is well distributed in Bangladesh. So, there will be highly possibility to
establish this pathogen in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.

Yes
and
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
Low

• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established

7.3.B.11.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.11.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - No.
• Though, it is an important pest of Citrus and grasses. But Bangladesh does
not import any fruits and plant materials from the countries where this pest
already present.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• In 2005, due to the infestation of X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca in citrus, it
caused major losses in Brazil and Argentina.
• By contrast, phony disease of peach does not kill trees or cause dieback,
but it does significantly reduce the size and number of fruits.
c. Environmental Impact
• No ecological changes have been documented.
• No quantitatively documented impacts on biodiversity have been reported
(European Food Safety Authority, 2015).

Yes
and
Low
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.B.11.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.11.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – Low

7.3.B.11.9. Risk Management Measures

It should be forbidden or strongly limited to import citrus fruits and plant materials from nations
where X. fastidiosa subsp. pauca is present. If imported planting material is used, it must be kept
in post-entry quarantine for two years and proven to be pest-free. Vector-free plants and fruits
should be imported, maybe with the help of a suitable treatment. According to Goheen et al.
(1973), a temperature treatment that kills the bacteria (45°C for at least 3 hours) may be useful
as a phytosanitary measure.

7.3.B.11.10. References
Coletta-Filho, H.D., Francisco, C.S., Lopes, J.R.S., Oliveira, A.F. and Silva, L.F.O. (2016). First report
of olive leaf scorch in Brazil, associated with Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca. Phytopathologia
Mediterranea, 55(1):130-135.
Elbeaino, T., Valentini, F., Kubaa, R.A., Moubarak, P., Yaseen, T. and Digiaro, M. (2014). Multilocus
sequence typing of Xylella fastidiosa isolated from olive affected by "olive quick decline
syndrome" in Italy. Phytopathologia Mediterranea, 53(3):533-542.
EPPO, 2022. EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
European Food Safety Authority. (2015). Scientific opinion on the risks to plant health posed by Xylella
fastidiosa in the EU territory, with the identification and evaluation of risk reduction options.
EFSA Journal, 13(1):3989. http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/doc/3989.pdf
European Food Safety Authority. (2016). Update of a database of host plants of Xylella fastidiosa: 20
November 2015. EFSA Journal, 14(2):4378. http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/4378
Goheen, A.C., Nyland, G. and Lowe, S.K. (1973). Association of a rickettsia like organism with Pierce's
disease of grapevines and alfalfa dwarf and heat therapy of the disease in grapevines.
Phytopathology, 63(3):341-345.
Meng, Y.Z., Li, Y.X. and Galvani, C.D. (2005). Upstream migration of Xylella fastidiosa via pilus-driven
twitching motility. Journal of Bacteriology, 187:5560-5567.
Olmo, D., Nieto, A., Adrover, F., Urbano, A., Beidas, O., Juan, A., Marco-Noales, E., López, M. M.,
Navarro, I., Monterde, A., Montes-Borrego, M., Navas-Cortés, J.A. and Landa, B.B., 2017. First
detection of Xylella fastidiosa infecting cherry (Prunus avium) and Polygala myrtifolia plants, in
Mallorca Island, Spain.Plant Disease, 101(10) 1820.
Purcell, A.H. and Saunders, S. (1995). Harvested grape clusters as inoculum for Pierce's disease. Plant
Disease, 79(2):190-192.
Tolocka, P.A., Mattio, M.F., Paccioretti, M.A., Otero, M.L., Roca, M.E., Guzman, F.A. and Haelterman,
R.M. (2017). Xylella fastidiosa subsp. pauca ST69 in olive in Argentina. Journal of Plant
Pathology. 99 (3), 803.

7.3.B.12.
Stubborn disease of citrus, Spiroplasma citri

7.3.B.12.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Stubborn disease of citrus
Scientific name: Spiroplasma citri (Saglio et al., 1973)
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Bacteria
Phylum: Mycoplasmatota
Class: Mollicutes
Order: Mycoplasmatales
Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Genus: Spiroplasma
Species: Spiroplasma citri

EPPO Code: SPIRCI, EU annex designation: II/A2.
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [EPPO 2022]
7.3.B.12.2. Biology
In citrus, spiroplasm grows best in hot temperatures (28–32°C) and may not manifest any
obvious symptoms in lower temps. Annual plants that have been infected experimentally are
quickly killed at temperatures exceeding 30°C, although they might not exhibit symptoms at
lower temperatures as well (Oldfield, 1988).
S. citri creates pleomorphic cells without walls that have the distinctive spiral shape. Helixes can
be made with a minimum feasible length of 2.0 x 0.1–0.2 m. The helices can move by rotating
or flexing. Some strains lack both motility and helicity. One of the extremely rare plant
pathogenic mollicutes that have been cultured is S. citri. For further information on biochemical
assays, cultured behaviour, and morphology, see Bradbury (1991).
7.3.B.12.3. Hosts
The primary hosts for this bacterium are Citrus spp. and horse radish (Alar et al., 2020; Mello et
al., 2008). There are various alternate hosts, such as Johnson grass, foxglove, cruciferous crops,
amaranthus, and wild radish (Sertkaya, 2002). In addition, according to Nejat et al. (2011), S.
citri inhabits or is connected with a number of host plants, including zinnia, horned violet,
sesame, radish, European pear, peach, sweet cherry, rice, turnip, Chinese cabbage, cabbage,
cauliflower, black mustard, etc.

7.3.B.12.4. Distribution

Africa: Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Sudan (CABI, 2021).
Asia: Israel, Malaysia, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates (CABI, 2021)
North America: USA, Mexico (CABI, 2021).
Europe: France, Italy, Spain, Turkey (CABI, 2021).
Oceania: New Zealand (CABI, 2021).

7.3.B.12.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that S. citri -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (EPPO, 2022).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus. It
can survive in radish, cabbage, cauliflower, rice, mustard, sesame, zinnia, sweet cherry etc.
• It is found at the countries (Egypt, USA and Pakistan) from where a large number of citruses
are imported to Bangladesh.
• The theoretical possibility exists that infective vectors may be carried on citrus plants, the
insects concerned are actively mobile and do not preferentially feed on citrus, so the risk
seems minor.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. And it has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic and ecological damage to citrus.
• S. citri is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential hazard
organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.B.12.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.12.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -

No
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– No
• Natural transmission by leafhoppers will carry S. citri over local distances.
International spread would be more likely to occur in infected budwood.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes
• Bangladesh imported citrus fruits and plant materials from the countries
(Egypt, USA and Pakistan) where S. citri present.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• S. citri's primary hosts are Citrus spp. In addition, S. citri has other related
hosts that are widely cultivated in Bangladesh, including zinnia, sesame,
radish, European pear, peach, sweet cherry, rice, turnip, Chinese cabbage,
cabbage, cauliflower, and black mustard. Therefore, there is a good chance
that this virus will spread to Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.

Yes
and
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.B.12.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.12.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• Nevertheless, it is a significant citrus pest. Agricultural crops (rice,
mustard, cabbage, cauliflower, radish, sesame, sweet cherry, etc.) that were
commonly grown in Bangladesh are among its large variety of related
hosts. Therefore, if the insect enters Bangladesh, it will pose a significant
pest problem for Bangladesh.

Yes
and
High

b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• Citrus is susceptible to the dangerous disease Stubborn, which can
significantly lower the yield's quality and quantity in hot, dry weather.
• The principal hosts in California (USA) are orange, grapefruit, and tangelo
trees, with an estimated 5–10% of trees being afflicted.
• Although S. citri naturally infects a variety of other hosts, these do not
appear to be affected economically. Their primary importance would be as
S. citri reservoirs for citrus infection. The brittle root of horseradish is only
anecdotally interesting (EPPO, 2022).
c. Environmental Impact
• No ecological changes have been documented.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.B.12.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.12.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.B.12.9. Risk Management Measures

Citrus fruits and plant materials from nations with S. citri should not be imported or should only
be imported with rigorous restrictions. The only feasible way to prevent reinfection during the
early years of orchard development is to produce healthy budwood. In the vicinity of orchards,
trap plants should be planted (Gumpf, 1988).

7.3.B.12.10. References
Bradbury, J.F. (1991). Spiroplasma citri. CMI Descriptions of Fungi and Bacteria, No. 1046.
Wallingford, UK: CAB International.
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
Çağlar, B.K., Satar, G., Baloğlu, S., Drais, M.I., Djelouah, K. (2020). Detection of Spiroplasma citri from
citrus trees in Turkey by molecular techniques. Mediterranean Agricultural Sciences, 33(1) 37-

EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Gumpf, D.J. (1988). Stubborn diseases of citrus caused by Spiroplasma citri. In: Maramorosch K,
Raychaudhuri SP, eds. Mycoplasma Diseases of Crops. Basic and Applied Aspects. New York,
USA: Springer-Verlag, 327-342.
Mello, A.F.S., Yokomi, R.K., Melcher, U., Chen, J.C.C. and Fletcher, J. (2010). Citrus stubborn severity
is associated with Spiroplasma citri titer but not with bacterial genotype. Plant Disease, 94(1)
75-82.
Nejat, N., Vadamalai, G., Sijam, K. and Dickinson, M. (2011). First report of Spiroplasma citri (-induced)
associated with periwinkle lethal yellows in Southeast Asia. Plant Disease, 95(10):1312.
http://apsjournals.apsnet.org/loi/pdis
Oldfield, G.N. (1988). Ecological associations of Spiroplasma citri with insects, plants and other plant
mycoplasmas in the western United States. In: Maramorosch K, Raychaudhuri SP, eds.
Mycoplasma Diseases of Crops. Basic and Applied Aspects. New York, USA: Springer-Verlag,
175-191.
Saglio, P., L'Hospital, M., LaflFche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. and Freundt, E.A. (1973).
Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp. n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with stubborn disease
of citrus. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology, 23:191-204.
Sertkaya, G. (2002). Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers.) as a host of citrus stubborn diseases
(Spiroplasma citri Saglio et al.) in the Eastern Mediterranean Region of Turkey. In: Proceedings
of the 12th EWRS Symposium Wageningen 2002, Papendal, Arnhem, The Netherlands, 24-27
June 2002, [ed. by Laar, H. H. van der]. Doorwerth, Netherlands: European Weed Research
Society. 66-67.

7.3.C. DISEASE CAUSING PATHOGEN: VIRUS
7.3.C.13.
Citrus exocortis virus, Citrus exocortis viroid

7.3.C.13.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus exocortis virus
Scientific name: Citrus exocortis viroid
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Viruses and viroids
Category: Viroids
Family: Pospiviroidae
Genus: Pospiviroid
Species: Citrus exocortis viroid
EPPO Code: CEVD00. Bahrain, Jordan and United Kingdom were listed this pest in their A1
list in 2003, 2013 and 2020, respectively. Argentina and IAPSC were listed this pest in their A2
list in 2019 and 1989, respectively. Mexico listed as quarantine pest in 2018 and Switzerland
listed as regulated non-quarantine pest in 2019 (EPPO, 2022).
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [EPPO, 2022]
7.3.C.13.2. Biology
Citrus exocortis viroid is transmitted through seed and propagative materials of plants (Singh et
al., 2009).

7.3.C.13.3. Hosts
Citrus spp. is the main host for this virous (Dang et al., 2021). There are some alternative hosts
which includes- turnip rape, jessamine, carrot, tomato, potato, French marigold, grapevine etc.
(Shu et al., 2010).

7.3.C.13.4. Distribution

Africa: Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Sudan, South Africa (CABI, 2021).
Asia: Israel, Malaysia, Oman, Pakistan, India, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Turkey,
China, Thailand, Indonesia, Philippines, Japan (CABI, 2021)
North America: USA, Mexico, Cabnada (CABI, 2021).
South America: Argentina, Brazil, Chile (CABI, 2021).
Europe: France, Italy, Spain, Germany, Netherlands, Greece (CABI, 2021).
Oceania: Australia, New Zealand (CABI, 2021).

7.3.C.13.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that Citrus exocortis virus -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (CABI, 2021).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus. It
can survive in tomato, potato, turnip rape, jessamine, carrot etc.
• It is found at the countries (Brazil, China, India, Egypt, South Africa, Thailand, Australia,
USA and Pakistan) from where a large number of citruses are imported to Bangladesh.
• This virus is transmitted through seeds and propagating materials so there will be possibility
to enter into Bangladesh at the time of citrus fruit import.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. And it has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic damage to citrus.
• Citrus exocortis virus is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a potential
hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.C.13.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.13.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -

No
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– Yes
• Citrus exocortis virus can survival into the seed of citrus at the time of
transport, storage and transfer.

c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes

Yes
and
Moderate

• Bangladesh imported citrus fruits and plant materials from the countries
(Brazil, China, India, Egypt, South Africa, Thailand, Australia, USA and
Pakistan) where Citrus exocortis virus present.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• The primary hosts of the Citrus exocortis virus include Citrus spp. In
addition, Bangladesh has a good distribution of the alternate related hosts
(tomato, potato, turnip rape, jessamine, carrot, etc.) of the Citrus exocortis
virus. Therefore, there is a good chance that this virus will spread to
Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.C.13.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.13.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• Though, it is an important pest of Citrus. And its associated host range is
wide including agricultural crops (tomato, potato, turnip rape, jessamine,
carrot etc.) which were widely present in Bangladesh. So, if the pest inserts
into Bangladesh, then it will be the serious pest for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• In Belize, CEV-infected budwood was brought into the country and
propagated on Carrizo citrange rootstock, which is susceptible to CEV.
• The costs of maintaining a block planted with CEV-infected budwood and
a grove planted with the same variety on Carrizo citrange rootstock under
the same owner/management system were then compared. 225 trees were
planted per hectare in each of the blocks. In comparison to the block
propagated with viroid-free budwood, the block created with CEVinfected budwood had a total loss of US$ 5147 per hectare after 8 years
(Roistacher et al., 1997).
c. Environmental Impact
• No ecological changes have been documented.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low
7.3.C.13.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.13.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.C.13.9. Risk Management Measures

As long as CEV is designated as a target graft transmissible disease to be eradicated from mother
trees, clean stock and certification programmes effectively suppress viroids. It is important to
take precautions to avoid spreading known CEV-contaminated bud sources onto vulnerable
rootstocks. It is important to take precautions to sterilise equipment before trimming or cutting
another plant since CEV can easily mechanically transmitted on infected knives and cutting
tools. Cutting tools should be sterilised using sodium hypochlorite or similar sterilant that has
been shown to successfully inactivate viroids. Only Poncirus trifoliata and hybrids made up of
P. trifoliata, limes, lemons, and citrons are symptomatic hosts, even though other Citrus species
are susceptible to CEV. To establish a trifoliate-type rootstock with tolerance for CEV,
intergeneric somatic hybrids between red tangerine (C. reticulata) and P. trifoliata have been
created in China (Guo et al., 2002).

7.3.C.13.10. References
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
Dang, T., Huang, A., Bodaghi, S., Tan, S., Tian, T., Posis, K., McGuire, B., McRoberts, N. and Vidalakis,
G. (2021). First report of citrus leaf blotch virus infecting bearss lime tree in California. Plant
Disease. 104(11): 3088-3089.
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Guo, W.W., Cheng, Y.J. and Deng, X.X. (2002). Regeneration and molecular characterization of
intergeneric somatic hybrids between Citrus reticulata and Poncirus trifoliata. Plant Cell
Reports. 20(9):829-834.
Roistacher, C.N., Canton, H. and Reddy, P.S. (1997). The economics of living with citrus viroids in
Belize. Proceedings of the 13th Conference International Organization of Citrus Virologists, 369-
Shu, J., Wang, G. P., Xu, W. X. and Hong, N. (2010). First report of Citrus exocortis viroid from
grapevine in China. Plant Disease, 94(8) 1071.
Singh, R.P., Dilworth, A.D. and Ao, X. (2009). Citrus exocortis viroid transmission through
commercially-distributed seeds of Impatiens and Verbena plants. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 124: 691–
694 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-009-9440-4

7.3.C.14.
Indian citrus ringspot virus, Indian citrus ringspot virus

7.3.C.14.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Indian citrus ringspot virus
Scientific name: Indian citrus ringspot virus
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Virus
Group: Positive sense ssRNA viruses
Group: RNA viruses
Order: Tymovirales
Family: Alphaflexiviridae
Genus: Mandarivirus
Species: Indian citrus ringspot virus
EPPO Code: ICRSV0. Argentina was listed this pest in their A1 list in 2019 and Mexico listed
as quarantine pest in 2018 (EPPO, 2022).
Bangladesh status: Not present in Bangladesh [EPPO, 2022]
7.3.C.14.2. Biology
The virus comprises particles with cross banding that are about 650 nm 15 nm in size. A 34 kDa
coat protein and 7560 nucleotides of single-stranded RNA are both present in the particles. The
six open-reading frames (ORFs) in the genomic RNA are potential proteins that are 187.3, 25,
12, 6.4, 34, and 23 kDa in size, respectively. The function of ORF 6 is unknown, while ORFs 1,
2, 3, and 4 make up the triple-gene block and ORFs 5, 6, and 7 encode the capsid protein,
respectively. Particles can be seen in the cytoplasm of parenchyma cells in thin leaf sections
(Rustici et al., 2000, 2002).
7.3.C.14.3. Hosts
Citrus spp. is the main host for this virous (Rustici et al., 2000).

7.3.C.14.4. Distribution

Asia: India, Pakistan (CABI, 2021)
7.3.C.14.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that Indian citrus ringspot virus -
• is not known to be present in Bangladesh (CABI, 2021).
• potentially economic important to Bangladesh because it is an important pest of Citrus.
• It is found in India and Pakistan from where a large number of citruses are imported to
Bangladesh.
• This virus is transmitted through seeds and propagating materials so there will be possibility
to enter into Bangladesh at the time of citrus fruit import.
• It can establish in Bangladesh through imports of the fruits and plant materials. And it has
capability to cause direct and indirect economic damage to citrus.
• Indian citrus ringspot virus is a quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a
potential hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.3.C.14.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in Bangladesh via this pathway

Table 7.14.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -

No
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– Yes
• Citrus exocortis virus can survival into the seed of citrus at the time of
transport, storage and transfer.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish? - Yes
• Bangladesh imported citrus fruits and plant materials from India and Pakistan
where Indian citrus ringspot virus present.
d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in Bangladesh and the climate is
similar to places it is established? – Yes
• Citrus spp. is the main hosts of Indian citrus ringspot virus. So, there will be
highly possibility to establish this pathogen in Bangladesh.
• The climate of Bangladesh is similar to places it is established.

Yes
and
Moderate
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.3.C.14.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.14.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of Bangladesh? - Yes.
• Though, it is an important pest of Citrus. And the required climate is same
for growth of this pest as it is established in neighboring countries like India
and Pakistan. So, if the pest inserts into Bangladesh, then it will be the
serious pest for Bangladesh.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• The number and weight of Kinnow mandarin (Citrus nobilis x Citrus
deliciosa) plant fruits were reduced by 45 and 55%, respectively, after
ICRSV infection. Fruit width, weight, length, granulation index, and juice
content all decreased by 11.59, 13.75, 38.88, 22.00, and 15.25%,
respectively, while shape index, peel, rag, and peel thickness all increased
by 2.32, 10.23, 32.41, and 50%, respectively. According to Lore et al.

Yes
and
High

(2001), infected fruits had lower levels of total soluble solids (12.96%),
ascorbic acid (9.09%), and reducing sugars (10.90%) but higher levels of
acidity (56.69%).
c. Environmental Impact
• No ecological changes have been documented.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.3.C.14.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.14.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.3.C.14.9. Risk Management Measures

By subjecting infected Kinnow mandarin (Citrus nobilis x Citrus deliciosa) bud-sticks to dry
heat for 30 minutes or more at 50°C or for 120 minutes at 45°C, the virus was destroyed. For the
effective and efficient control of ICRSV, the creation, multiplication, and distribution of such
virus-free plants are advised (Singh et al., 2006).
7.3.C.14.10. References
CABI.
Crop
Production
Compendium.
Spiroplasma
citri.
https://www.cabi.org/cpc/datasheet/50977
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/
Lore, J.S., Cheema, S.S. and Thind, S.K. (2001). Effect of citrus ring spot disease on yield and fruit
quality of Kinnow. Journal of Research, Punjab Agricultural University, 38(1/2):23-26.
Rustici, G., Accotto, G.P., Noris, E., Masenga, V., Luisoni, E. and Milne, R.G. (2000). Indian citrus
ringspot virus: a proposed new species with some affinities to potex-, carla-, fovea- and
allexiviruses. Archives of Virology, 145(9):1895-1908.
Rustici, G., Milne, R.G. and Accotto, G.P. (2002). Nucleotide sequence, genome organisation and
phylogenetic analysis of Indian citrus ringspot virus. Archives of Virology, 147(11):2215-2224
Singh, B., Sharma, S., Rani, G., Zaidi, A.A., Hallan, V., Virk, G.S. and Nagpal, A. (2006). In vitro
production of Indian citrus ringspot virus-free plants of Kinnow mandarin (Citrus nobilis Lour ×
C. deliciosa Tenora) by nucellar embryo culture. Plant Pathology Journal (Faisalabad), 5(3):274-

7.D. Conclusion: Pest Risk Potential and Pests Requiring Phytosanitary Measures
The Pest Risk Assessment (PRA) is based on the International Standard for Phytosanitary
Measures No 11 (2004) and the PRA scheme developed by CAB International (2007) and EPPO
(European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization) (1997).
From the quantitatively risk analysts of quarantine pests likely to be associated and follow the
citrus pathway to Bangladesh from Bhutan, India, China, Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan, South Africa,
USA, Thailand, Myanmar, Australia and other exporting countries, out 15 potential hazard
organisms, 12 hazard organisms were identified with high-risk potential, 1 moderate and 1 low
were identified with low-risk potential. Besides, 1 hazard organism was identified as uncertainly
due to lack of information.
The overall pest risk potential ratings of 15 quarantine pests of citrus for Bangladesh have been
included in the following Table 7.3:

Table 7.3: The Overall Pest Risk Potential Rating
Sl.
No
Potential
Hazard
Organism
Scientific name
Family
Order
Pest Risk
Potential
Insect pests
Citrus longhorn
beetle
Anoplophora chinensis
Cerambycidae
Coleoptera
High
Citrus weevil
Diaprepes abbreviates
Curculionidae
Coleoptera
High
African citrus
psyllid
Trioza erytreae
Triozidae
Homoptera
High
Mediterranean
fruit fly/Medfly
Ceratitis capitate
Tephritidae
Diptera
High
Queensland fruit
fly
Bactrocera tryoni
Tephritidae
Diptera
High
South
African
citrus thrips
Scirtothrips aurantia
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
High
California Citrus
thrips
Scirtothrips citri
Thripidae
Thysanoptera
High
Mite
Citrus rust mite
Phyllocoptruta oleivora
Eriophyidae
Acarina
High
Citrus bud mite
Aceria Sheldon
Eriophyidae
Acarina
High
Lewis spider
mite
Eotetranychus lewisi
Tetranychidae
Acarina
Moderate
Fungi

Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Mycosphaerellaceae
Capnodiales
Uncertain
Bacteria
Citrus variegated
chlorosis
Xylella fastidiosa subsp.
Pauca
Xanthomonadaceae
Xanthomonadales
Low
Citrus stubborn
Spiroplasma citri
Mycoplasmataceae
Mycoplasmatales
High
Virus
Citrus exocortis
Citrus exocortis viroid
Pospiviroidae
Incertae sedis
High
Indian
citrus
ringspot virus
Indian citrus ringspot
virus
Alphaflexiviridae Tymovirales
High

7.4. Uncertainty
The quarantine pest species those remain uncertainty as potential hazards due to lack of their
detail information. Such uncertain species was Greasy spot (Mycosphaerella citri). The
taxonomic identity of this uncertain species is given in the table 7.4.
Table 7.4: Quarantine pest species for Bangladesh likely to be associated with host plants
during importation from exporting countries, but remained as uncertain hazards
due to lack of detail information
Sl.
No.
Common
name
Scientific name
Family
Order
Greasy spot
Mycosphaerella citri
Mycosphaerellaceae Capnodiales

7.5. Risk Analysis of Regulated Non-quarantine pest
The risk assessment of regulated non-quarantine pests plays a critical role in safeguarding
agricultural industries and ecosystems against potential threats. In the context of citrus
cultivation, the focus of this assessment lies on three significant pests: the citrus leaf miner,
Citrus thrips and citrus canker. These pests, while not native to the region, have the potential to
cause substantial harm to citrus production and overall plant health if not managed effectively.

The risk assessment follows the guidelines outlined in ISPM 21 (International Standards for
Phytosanitary Measures), which provides a structured approach to evaluate the risks posed by
regulated non-quarantine pests. By adhering to this international standard, we aim to ensure a
comprehensive and scientifically sound assessment of the potential impacts of these pests on
citrus crops and the wider agricultural ecosystem.

The objective of this risk assessment is to identify the pathways of introduction, potential
establishment, and spread of these pests in the affected area. By evaluating their biology,
ecology, and behavior, as well as considering environmental and climatic factors, we aim to gain
a comprehensive understanding of their potential threat levels. Additionally, this assessment will
explore effective management strategies and mitigation measures to prevent or reduce the risks
posed by these regulated non-quarantine pests. The risk assessment of regulated non-quarantine
pests concerning Bangladesh is presented below.

7.5.1.
Citrus leaf miner, Phyllocnistis citrella

7.5.1.1 Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus leaf miner
Scientific name: Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton
Synonyms: Lithocolletis citricola
Phyllocnistis citricola Shiraki
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda
Subphylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta

Order: Lepidoptera
Family: Gracillariidae
Genus: Phyllocnistis
Species: Phyllocnistis citrella

EPPO Code: PHYNCI.
Bangladesh status: Present in Bangladesh [EPPO 2022]
7.5.1.2. Biology
P. citrella larvae usually mine the under surface of a leaf, but attack both surfaces in heavy
infestations, and occasionally fruit. The serpentine mine has a silvery appearance and reaches a
length of 50-100 mm. Young leaves are attacked and mines can cause leaf curl. Up to 20 mines
per leaf have been recorded on elephant lemon in India. There are four larval instars including a
pre-pupal stage when the larva does not feed. Development time is 5-20 days. Pupation takes
place within the mine, near the leaf margin, under a slight curl of the leaf. Pupation takes 6-22
days. P. citrella adults emerge at dawn and are active in the morning. They also fly at dusk and
by night. Continuously brooded, up to 13 generations have been reported in a year in India and
Egypt, 7 in a year in Tuscany, Italy.
7.5.1.3. Hosts
A list of reported and potential hosts is given by Heppner (1993). A pest of citrus, P. citrella also
attacks other Rutaceae. Citrus, Citrus aurantium (sour orange), Citrus sinensis (sweet orange),
Citrus reticulata (mandarin), Citrus medica (zara), Citrus maxima (pummelo), Citrus limonia
(mandarin lime) are the main host of the insect.

7.5.1.4. Distribution

Originally an Asiatic species, P. citrella was discovered in Florida, USA, in 1993 and has since
spread throughout the state. It was found in the Mediterranean basin in 1994 where it has since
spread rapidly. It is also spreading in Central and South America and has been reported from
southern Africa and West Africa.

In addition to the records on the map, P. citrella has been identified in Lebanon, Libya,
Mozambique, Brazil and Colombia (J LaSalle, IIE, UK, personal communication, 1997). It has
also been identified in Oman (T Pittaway, CABI, Wallingford, UK, personal communication,
1996) and Zimbabwe (DJL Agassiz, IIE, UK, personal communication, 1997).
Africa: Algeria; Egypt; Nigeria; South Africa; Tanzania (EPPO, 2022)
Asia: Bangladesh (UK, CAB International 1986); Bhutan, China; India; Indonesia; Japan,
Malaysia; Myanmar; Nepal; Pakistan; Sri Lanka; Thailand; United Arab Emirates; Vietnam
(EPPO, 2022)
Europe: Croatia, Cyprus, France, Greece, Spain, Sweden (UK, CAB International 1986)
North America: Mexico, United States (UK, CAB International 1986)
South America: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru (UK, CAB International 1986)
Oceania: Australia (UK, CAB International 1986)

7.5.1.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that P. citrella -
• is present in Bangladesh [UK, CAB International 1986]

• P. citrella is a major pest of citrus, found in virtually all major citrus-producing areas. Heavy
infestations can hinder the growth of newly planted trees or reduce fruit production of mature
trees. Larval feeding reduces the photosynthetic capacity of leaves and increases the
susceptibility of leaves to citrus bacterial canker, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri
(Gottwald et al., 2007; Hall et al., 2010)
• P. citrella is a regulated non-quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a
potential hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.5.1.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in importing countries via this pathway

Table 7.5.1.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establishment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent
years? - Yes
• The citrus leaf miner is native to eastern and southern Asia and is now
widely distributed where citrus is grown in Asia, Papua New Guinea,
Australia, northern and central Africa, and Florida in the United States of
America. It has been linked to the severity of citrus canker (Xanthomonas
axonopodis pv. citri), a serious disease of citrus.
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and
transfer? – Yes
• Larval development time is 5-20 days. Pupation takes 6-22 days. P. citrella
adults emerge at dawn and are active in the morning. They also fly at dusk
and by night. Continuously brooded, up to 13 generations have been
reported in a year in India and Egypt, 7 in a year in Tuscany, Italy.
• This period of time taken for shipment through transportation pathways
from Bangladesh to importing countries is sufficient enough for survival of
this pest. Secondly, fruit is packed in wrapping (wooden boxes) and stored
in normal conditions. So, the pests could survive during transporting
process.
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter importing countries
and establish? - Yes,
• Long-range dispersal occurs largely through the transport of fruit and
planting materials containing adults. P. citrella has been intercepted in
citrus fruits in international trade (USDA, 1988; SPC, 1989).

d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in the importing countries and the
climate is similar to places it is established? – Yes
• A pest of citrus, P. citrella also attacks other Rutaceae. Citrus, Citrus
aurantium (sour orange), Citrus sinensis (sweet orange), Citrus reticulata
(mandarin), Citrus medica (zara), Citrus maxima (pummelo), Citrus
limonia (mandarin lime) are the main host of the insect.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
Low

• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to
places it is established

7.5.1.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.5.1.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of importing countries? - Yes.
• It is an important pest of citrus. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits and plant
materials are imported from Bangladesh, there will be possibility to establish
the pest in the importing countries.
• If the pest establishes in the importing countries, it will be a fairly serious pest
of mango in that country/ies.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• P. citrella is a major pest of citrus, found in virtually all major citrusproducing areas. Heavy infestations can hinder the growth of newly planted
trees or reduce fruit production of mature trees. Larval feeding reduces the
photosynthetic capacity of leaves and increases the susceptibility of leaves to
citrus bacterial canker, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Gottwald et al.,
2007; Hall et al., 2010)
• Originating in the Far East, P. citrella spread rapidly to other citrus-growing
areas during the 1990s. Damage to young trees can be severe and populations
can increase dramatically under heavy pesticide regimes such as those
currently practiced in Florida (USA) for control of a separate pest and vector
of citrus greening disease, the Asian citrus psyllid Diaphorina citri. The
location of larvae inside the mine protects the insects from most topical
sprays.
• Huang and Li (1989) considered the economic threshold of P. citrella to be
0.74 larvae per susceptible (tender) leaf. If the percentage of damaged area in
susceptible leaves is below 20% there will be no negative impact on growth,
development or yield of citrus fruit. However, a major concern of producers
of high-quality fresh fruit for export markets is the increased susceptibility of
leaves damaged by the leafminer to infection by citrus canker disease. Loss
of access to international markets due to phytosanitary controls is a major
economic impact related to leafminer damage.

c. Environmental Impact
• Wide range of insecticides were used against P. citrella. So, indiscriminate
uses of these insecticide play negative impact on the environment.
• Effectively controlling citrus leaf miner using chemicals is difficult because
larvae are protected by their mines and pupae are protected by their pupal
chambers. Insecticides, such as organophosphates, carbamates, and
pyrethroids, also disrupt the activity of natural enemies. Such disruption can
lead to outbreaks of other pests (e.g., scales and mites).

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.5.1.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.5.1.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.5.1.9. Risk Management Measures

Consignments of fruits to importing countries or regions should be inspected for symptoms of
infestation and those suspected should be cut open in order to look for the symptom. Zhang et
al. (1994) outlined a programme using cultural practices, with the possibility of releasing
parasitoids and predators when necessary, with carefully timed applications of Bacillus
thuringiensis. Mating disruption should provide an excellent management option if the
pheromone dispensers become widely available to growers, especially when combined with
biological control and minimal chemical control.
7.5.1.10. References
Heppner JB, 1993. Citrus leafminer, Phyllocnistis citrella, in Florida (Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae:
Phyllocnistinae). Tropical Lepidoptera, 4(1):49-64.
UK, CAB International, 1986. Phyllocnistis citrella. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant
Pests,
Wallingford,
UK:
CAB
International.
Map
(Revised).
DOI:10.1079/DMPP/20056600274
Hall DG, Gottwald TR, Bock CH, 2010. Exacerbation of citrus canker by citrus leafminer Phyllocnistis
citrella in Florida. Florida Entomologist, 93(4):558-566. http://www.fcla.edu/FlaEnt/
Gottwald TR, Bassanezi RB, Amorim L, Bergamin Filho A, 2007. Spatial pattern analysis of citrus
canker-infected plantings in São Paulo, Brazil, and augmentation of infection elicited by the
Asian leafminer. Phytopathology, 97(6):674-683.
Huang M, Li S, 1989. The damage and economic threshold of citrus leafminer Phyllocnistis citrella
(Stainton) in citrus. In: Studies on the Integrated Management of Citrus Insect Pests. Academic
Bood and Periodical Press. Beijing. [Chinese, English abstract]

7.5.2
Citrus thrips, Scirtothrips dorsalis (Hood, 1919)

7.5.2.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus thrips

Scientific name: Scirtothrips dorsalis (Hood, 1919)
Synonyms: Anaphothrips andreae (Karny, 1925)
Heliothrips minutissimus (Bagnall, 1919)
Neophysopus fragariae (Girault, 1927)
Scirtothrips dorsalis var. padmae (Ramakrishna, 1942)
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Metazoa
Phylum: Arthropoda

Sub-phylum: Uniramia
Class: Insecta
Order: Thysanoptera
Family: Thripidae
Genus: Scirtothrips
Species: Scirtothrips dorsalis
EPPO Code: SCITDO.
Bangladesh status: Present in Bangladesh (Ahmed et al., 2019)
7.5.2.2. Biology
The egg usually has an oval shape, is pale to yellowish, narrows anteriorly, and is incubated for
4-6 days. The first instar larva is translucent, with a short body and larger legs, short, inflated
antennae, a bent and short mouth cone, and seven segmented, cylindrical antennae.
Sclerotization is diffuse, and the head and thorax have reticulation. The larva's second instar has
larger, cylindrical, seven-segmented antennae, a longer mouth cone, three-segmented maxillary
palpi, longer body setae than the first instar, and reticulate skin on the head and thorax. The pupa
is dark yellow, with red eyes and ocelli. Its wing buds are lengthy, and its antennae are short and
reflected over its head. Female pupae have a bigger, pointed abdomen, while male pupae are
smaller and have a blunt abdomen. Backward-curving antennas cross the head. Adults are nearly
white upon emergence, becoming yellowish later; abdominal tergites have a median dark patch;
tergites and sternites have a dark antecostal ridge; pair III of ocellar setae is located between
posterior ocelli; two pairs of median post-ocular setae are present; pronotum has four pairs of
posteromarginal setae; major setae are 25-30 m long; metanotum medially has sternites with
numerous microtrichia, more than two full rows medially; forewing first vein with three setae
distally, second vein with two setae, posteromarginal cilia straight; tergal microtrichial fields
with three discal setae, VIII and IX with microtrichia; Male on tergite IX without a drepanae
(CABI, 2021).
7.5.2.3. Hosts
S. dorsalis is polyphagous and has been recorded feeding and breeding on more than 100 plant
species in 40 families.
Major hosts of S. dorsalis are okra, onion, garlic, cashew nut, groundnut, asparagus, beetroot,
tea, bell pepper, chilli, Citrus spp., marrow, garden dahlia, longan tree, persimmon, Strawberry,
soyabean, cotton, sunflower, rubber, sweet potato, hyacinth bean, mango, sensitive plant,
mulberry tree, rambutan, tobacco, passion fruit, common bean, peach, pomegranate, pears,
blackberry, tomato, water apple, tamarind, mung bean, grapevine, sweetcorn, jujube etc.
(Affandi et al., 2019).
7.5.2.4. Distribution

Africa: South Africa (EPPO, 2022)

Asia: Bangladesh (Biswas, 2014), China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan,
Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand (Kumar and Rachana, 2021)
Europe: Netherlands, Spain, United Kingdom (IPPC, 2009)
North America: Mexico, United States (Seebens et al., 2017)
South America: Brazil (Dias-Pini et al., 2018)
Oceania: Australia (Mound and Palmer, 1981)

7.5.2.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that S. dorsalis -
• is present in Bangladesh (Ahmed et al., 2019)
• The fruit and plant materials of citrus containing eggs and larvae of this pest is the main risk
of introducing S. dorsalis. It represents a risk to citrus-growing regions like Italy, France,
Germany, Greece, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, Bahrain and United Arab Emirates where
it has not been reported or is not widespread.
• S. dorsalis is a regulated non-quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered to be a
potential hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.5.2.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in importing countries via this pathway

Table 7.5.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years? -
Yes
• One of the most significant citrus pests, S. dorsalis, is common in most nations
that grow citrus. From Vietnam and China, it is introduced to Taiwan and
Japan (Dickey et al., 2015a).
• One of the most significant citrus diseases, S. dorsalis, is common in the
majority of citrus-growing nations. It is brought from Vietnam and China to
Taiwan and Japan (Dickey et al., 2015a).
• Blueberries in Michoacán provided the first evidence of S. dorsalis in Mexico
(Ortiz et al., 2020).
• S. dorsalis was discovered in Californian blueberries in 2021. This pest has
been spotted there since 2015, when it was also discovered to be a problem
for roses.
• In Turkey, where samples were taken from blueberries growing in Adana, S.
dorsalis was discovered for the first time in 2020 (Atakan and Pehlivan,
b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– Yes
• Human activities played a major role in the spread of S. dorsalis via the
movement of contaminated propagative materials.

Yes
and
High

• Long distance non-human mediated travel is possible and probably results
with the assistance of wind (Kumar et al., 2014).
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter importing countries
and establish? - Yes,
• Fruits and plant materials containing eggs and adults of S. dorsalis are the
important pathway to enter the importing countries.

d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in the importing countries and the
climate is similar to places it is established? – Yes
• S. dorsalis is the most serious insect pest of Citrus spp. and have various
alternative hosts to establish.
• S. dorsalis preferred temperate and warmer climatic condition for its growth
and survival (Seal et al., 2010). So, all climatic conditions were suitable to
establish the pest.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.5.2.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.5.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of importing countries? - Yes.
• It is an important pest of Citrus spp. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits
and plant materials are imported from Bangladesh, there will be possibility
to establish the pest in the importing countries.
• If the pest establishes in the importing countries, it will be a fairly serious
pest of citrus in that country/ies.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• Significant plant disease or host plant death caused by thrips vector viruses
is found to increase difficulties in addition to damage from thrips eating.
In order to reliably assess pest populations and enable the timely
application of treatments, much work has been put into designing sampling
plans. Research has examined the effectiveness of control methods,
particularly insecticides and natural enemies, highlighting the necessity to
manage this pest to reduce financial losses.
c. Environmental Impact
• Wide range of insecticides were used against S. dorsalis. So, indiscriminate
uses of these pesticides play negative impact on the environment.

Yes
and
High
• Not as above or below
Moderate

• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.5.2.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.5.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.5.2.9. Risk Management Measures

Strict phytosanitary procedures are required to stop S. dorsalis from unintentionally spreading to
new locations. Long-distance unintentional spread into new places is facilitated by the movement
of live plants with S. dorsalis infestations. For instance, visual detection of S. dorsalis life phases
by quarantine personnel is exceedingly problematic because all life stages are very small and
difficult to locate. Because thrips adults and larvae exhibit thigmotaxis and hide in cracks, it is
more difficult to find them. Thrips eggs are placed inside leaf tissue.
7.5.2.10. References
Affandi, Medina, C.R., Velasco, L.R.I., Javier, P.A., Depositario, D.P.T., Mansyah, E. and Hardiyanto.
(2019). Population dynamic of Scirtothrips dorsalis Hood (thysanopetera: Thripidae) on mango
and associated weeds under low and intensive agricultural practices. AGRIVITA, Journal of
Agricultural Science. 41 (3), 575-585.
Ahmed, H.U., Latif, M.A., Huq, M.F., Mia, A.T., Latif, M.A., Rahman, M.A. and Ahmed, S. (2019).
Developing pest list of plants and plant products in Bangladesh. Strengthening phytosanitary
capacity in Bangladesh project. Plant Quarantine Wing. Department of Agricultural Extension.
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka-1215.
Atakan, E. and Pehlivan, S. (2021). First report of the chilli thrips, Scirtothrips dorsalis Hood 1919
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae), in Turkey. Turkish Journal of Zoology, 45(2) 156-160.
Biswas, G.C. (2014). Insect pests of groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.), nature of damage and succession
with the crop stages. Bangladesh Journal of Agricultural Research. 39 (2), 273-282.
CABI. (2021). Bactrocera dorsalis. [Distribution map]. In: Distribution Maps of Plant Pests,
Wallingford, UK:
Dias-Pini, N.S., Lima, M.G.A., Lima, E.F.B., Maciel, G.P.S. and Duarte, P.M. (2018). Scirtothrips
dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae): a newly introduced polyphagous pest in northeastern Brazil.
Neotropical Entomology. 47 (5), 725-728.
Dickey, A.M., Kumar, V., Hoddle, M.S., Funderburk, J.E., Morgan, J.K., Jara-Cavieres, A., Shatters,
R.G. Jr., Osborne, L.S. and McKenzie, C.L. (2015). The Scirtothrips dorsalis complex:
endemism and invasion in a global pest. PLoS ONE, 10(4) e0123747.
EPPO. (2022). EPPO Global database. In: EPPO Global database, Paris, France: EPPO. 1 pp.
https://gd.eppo.int/

IPPC. (2009). Scirtothrips dorsalis. In: IPPC Official Pest Report, Rome, Italy: FAO.
https://www.ippc.int/IPP/En/default.jsp
Kumar, P.S. and Rachana, R.R. (2021). Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) is a pest of celery,
Apium graveolens (Apiales: Apiaceae): first report and diagnostic characters. Journal of
Integrated Pest Management. 12 (46), DOI:10.1093/jipm/pmab039
Kumar, V., Kakkar, G., Seal, D.R., McKenzie, C.L., Colee, J. and Osborne, L.S. (2014). Temporal and
spatial distribution of an invasive thrips species Scirtothrips dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae).
Crop Protection, 5580-90.
Mound, L.A. and Palmer, J.M. (1981). Identification, distribution and host-plants of the pest species of
Scirtothrips (Thysanoptera: Thripidae). Bulletin of Entomological Research. 71 (3), 467-479.
Ortiz, J.A., Infante, F., Rodriguez, D. and Toledo-Hernandez, R.A. (2020). Discovery of Scirtothrips
dorsalis (Thysanoptera: Thripidae) in blueberry fields, Michoacán Mexico. Florida
Entomologist, 103(3) 408-410.
Seal, D.R., Kalssen, W. and Kumar, V. (2010). Biological parameters of Scirtothrips dorsalis
(Thysanoptera: Thripidae) on selected hosts. Florida Entomologist, 39(5) 1389-1398.
Seebens, H., Blackburn, T.M., Dyer, E.E., Genovesi, P., Hulme, P.E., Jeschke, J.M., Pagad, S., Pyšek,
P., Winter, M., Arianoutsou, M., Bacher, S., Blasius, B., Brundu, G., Capinha, C., CelestiGrapow, L., Dawson, W., Dullinger, S., Fuentes, N., Jäger, H., Kartesz, J., Kenis, M., Kreft, H.,
Kühn, I., Lenzner, B., Liebhold, A. and Mosena, A. (2017). No saturation in the accumulation of
alien species worldwide. Nat. Comm. 8(2): 14435.
Behlau, F., Belasque, J., Jr., Leite, R.P., Jr., Bergamin-Filho, A., Gottwald, T.R., Graham, J.H., Scandelai,
L.H.M., Primiano, I.V., Bassanezi, R.B. and Ayres, A.J. (2021a). Relative contribution of
windbreak, copper sprays, and leafminer control for citrus canker management and prevention
of crop loss in sweet orange trees. Plant Disease, 105(8) 2097-2105.
Ference, C.M., Gochez, A.M., Behlau, F., Wang, N., Graham, J.H. and Jones, J.B. (2018). Recent
advances in the understanding of Xanthomonas citri ssp. citri pathogenesis and citrus canker
disease management. Molecular Plant Pathology, 19(6) 1302-1318.
Goto, M. (1992). Citrus canker. In: Plant Diseases of International Importance, Vol. III, Diseases of Fruit
Crops, [ed. by Kumar, J., Chaube, H.S., Singh, U.S., Mukhopadhyay, A.N.]. Englewood Cliffs,
USA: Prentice Hall. 170-208.
Leduc, A., Traoré, Y.N., Boyer, K., Magne, M., Grygiel, P., Juhasz, C.C., Boyer, C., Guerin, F., Wonni,
I., Ouedraogo, L., Vernière, C., Ravigné, V. and Pruvost, O. (2015). Bridgehead invasion of a
monomorphic plant pathogenic bacterium: Xanthomonas citri pv. citri, an emerging citrus
pathogen in Mali and Burkina Faso. Environmental Microbiology, 17(11) 4429-4442.
Li, W.B., Song, Q.J., Brlansky, R.H. and Hartung, J.S. (2007). Genetic diversity of citrus bacterial canker
pathogens preserved in herbarium specimens. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 104 (47), 18427-18432.
Lin, H.C., Feng, C.Y., Chang, Y.A. and Chang, H. (2012). Molecular typing and genetic characterization
of pathogenic variants of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri in Taiwan. Journal of
Phytopathology. 160 (9), 475-483.
Mirzaee, M.R. (2015). Citrus bacterial canker pustules are associated with leafminer galleries in Iran.
Journal of Plant Pathology, 97(1) 213.
Paola, R., Mariana, M., Raquel, d-C. and Mercedes, P. (2013). Characterization of Xanthomonas citri
sbsp. Strains. citrus, the causative agent of citrus cancer. (Caracterización de cepas de
Xanthomonas citri sbsp. citri, agente causal del cancro cítrico). Agrociencia. 17 (2), 64-74.
Ray, J.D., Taylor, R.K., Griffin, R.L., James, R.S., Dale, C., Ximines, A. and Jones, L.M., (2017).
Confirmation of Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri causing citrus canker in Timor-Leste.
Australasian Plant Disease Notes. 12 (1), 44.
Savitha, A.S., Ajithkumar, K., Palaiah, P. and Ramesh, G. (2016). Integrated management of citrus canker
caused by a Xnthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse) in acid lime (Citrus auruntifolia). Pest
Management in Horticultural Ecosystems. 22 (2), 189-192.
Schaad, N.W., Postnikova, E., Lacy, G.H., Sechler, A., Agarkova, I., Stromberg, P.E., Stromberg, V.K.
and Vidaver, A.K. (2005). Reclassification of Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri (ex Hasse 1915)
Dye 1978 forms A, B/C/D, and E as X. smithii subsp. citri (ex Hasse) sp. nov. nom. rev. comb.
nov., X. fuscans subsp. aurantifolii (ex Gabriel 1989) sp. nov. nom. rev. comb. nov., and X.
alfalfae subsp. citrumelo (ex Riker and Jones) Gabriel et al., 1989 sp. nov. nom. rev. comb. nov.;

X. campestris pv. malvacearum (ex Smith 1901) Dye 1978 as X. smithii subsp. smithii nov. comb.
nov. nom. nov.; X. campestris pv. alfalfae (ex Riker and Jones, 1935) Dye 1978 as X. alfalfae
subsp. alfalfae (ex Riker et al., 1935) sp. nov. nom. rev.; and "var. fuscans" of X. campestris pv.
phaseoli (ex Smith, 1987) Dye 1978 as X. fuscans subsp. fuscans sp. nov. Systematic and Applied
Microbiology, 28(6) 494-518.

7.5.3
Citrus canker, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse)

7.5.3.1. Hazard identification

Preferred Common names: Citrus canker
Scientific name: Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse)
Synonyms: Bacillus citri (Hasse) Holland
Bacterium citri (Hasse) Doidge
Phytomonas citri (Hasse) Bergey et al.
Pseudomonas citri Hasse
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. aurantifolii Vauterin et al.
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (ex Hasse) Vauterin et al.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. aurantifolii Gabriel et al.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri (Hasse) Dye
Xanthomonas citri Gabriel et al.
Xanthomonas citri f.sp. aurantifolia Namekata & Oliveira
Xanthomonas citri ssp. citri Schaad et al.
Xanthomonas fuscans ssp. aurantifolii Schaad et al.
Taxonomic tree
Domain: Eukaryota
Kingdom: Bacteria
Phylum: Proteobacteria
Class: Gammaproteobacteria
Order: Xanthomonadales
Family: Xanthomonadaceae
Genus: Xanthomonas
Species: Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri

EPPO Code: XANTCI.
Bangladesh status: Present in Bangladesh (Vernière et al., 2013)
7.5.3.2. Biology
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri is a Gram-negative, straight, rod-shaped bacterium measuring
1.5-2.0 x 0.5-0.75 μm. It is motile by means of a single, polar flagellum. Colonies are formed on
nutrient agar plates containing glucose and are creamy-yellow with copious slime. The yellow
pigment is xanthomonadin. Catalase is positive, but Kovacs' oxidase is negative or weak; nitrate
reduction is negative (Schaad et al., 2005).
7.5.3.3. Hosts

Major hosts of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri are Citrus spp., mango, Trifoliate orange,
Australian desert lime etc. (Ray et al., 2017).
7.5.3.4. Distribution

Asia: Bangladesh, Afghanistan, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal,
Pakistan, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, United Arab Emirates
(Savitha et al., 2016)
Europe: Italy, Netherlands (Li et al., 2007)
North America: Mexico, United States (Lin et al., 2012)
South America: Argentina, Brazil (Paola et al., 2013)
Oceania: Australia, New Zealand (Lin et al., 2012)

7.5.3.5. Hazard identification conclusion
Considering the facts that X. axonopodis pv. citri -
• is present in Bangladesh (Vernière et al., 2013)
• The fruit and plant materials of citrus containing latent of this bacterium is the main risk of
introducing X. axonopodis pv. citri. It represents a risk to citrus-growing regions like United
Kingdom, France, Germany, Greece, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark and Bahrain where it
has not been reported or is not widespread.
• X. axonopodis pv. citri is a regulated non-quarantine pest for Bangladesh and considered
to be a potential hazard organism in this risk analysis.

7.5.3.6. Determine likelihood of pest establishing in importing countries via this pathway

Table 7.3.1 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Establish
ment
Potential
a. Has this pest been established in several new countries in recent years?
- Yes
• X. axonopodis pv. citri is one of the most important citrus diseases and
widespread in most citrus-growing countries. It is a perennial disease which
probably originated from Asia (Vernière et al., 2014). Human activities have
played a major role in the spread of X. axonopodis pv. citri strains via the
movement of contaminated propagative materials (Leduc et al., 2015).

b. Possibility of survival of this pest during transport, storage and transfer?
– Yes
• Human activities played a major role in the spread of X. axonopodis pv. citri
strains via the movement of contaminated propagative materials (Leduc et
al., 2015).
• Association of bacterial canker pustules with leafminer (Phyllocnistis
citrella) tunnels was reported in Yemen, India and Iran (Mirzaee, 2015).

Yes
and
High

However, the insect is less likely to act as vector of the pathogen as leafminer
control has no effect on reducing citrus canker (Behlau et al., 2021a).
c. Does the pathway appear good for this pest to enter importing countries
and establish? - Yes,
• Fruits and plant materials containing strain of X. axonopodis pv. citri (which
were not visual) are the important pathway to enter into the importing
countries.

d. Are the host(s) of this fairly common in the importing countries and the
climate is similar to places it is established? – Yes
• X. axonopodis pv. citri is the most serious insect pest of Citrus spp. and
another alternative host of this pest is not recorded (Ference et al., 2018).
• X. axonopodis pv. citri preferred all kind of climatic condition for its growth
and survival. So, all climatic conditions were suitable to establish the pest.
• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This pest has not established in new countries in recent years, and
• The pathway does not appear good for this pest to enter Bangladesh and
establish, and
• Its host(s) are not common in Bangladesh and climate is not similar to places
it is established
Low

7.5.3.7. Determine the Consequence establishment of this pest in BangladeshTable 7.3.2 – Which of these descriptions best fit of this pest?
Description
Consequence
potential
a. Is this a serious pest of importing countries? - Yes.
• It is an important pest of Citrus spp. Therefore, it is a high risk, if fruits
and plant materials are imported from Bangladesh, there will be possibility
to establish the pest in the importing countries.
• If the pest establishes in the importing countries, it will be a fairly serious
pest of citrus in that country/ies.
b. Economic Impact and Yield Loss
• Citrus canker losses are generally caused by defoliation, early fruit
abscission, and imperfect fruit. Young, vulnerable trees frequently have
practically all of their fruits and foliage infected. In highly diseased young
trees, growth and attainment of full size may be delayed. The estimate of
loss has not fully shown the impact of the condition. Investigating the
potential risk of citrus canker spreading across continents via lesions on
marketable fruits is necessary. Financial losses result from decreased crop
yields, an increase in pesticide use, and market loss as a result of regulatory
restrictions.
c. Environmental Impact
• Wide range of insecticides were used against X. axonopodis pv. citri. So,
indiscriminate uses of these pesticides play negative impact on the
environment.

Yes
and
High

• Not as above or below
Moderate
• This is a not likely to be an important pest of common crops grown in
Bangladesh.
Low

7.5.3.8. Calculating the Risk of this Pest via this pathway for Bangladesh

Establishment Potential X Consequence Potential = Risk

Table 7.3.3 – Calculating risk rating
Establishment Potential
Consequence Potential
Risk Rating
High
High
High
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
High
High
Low
Moderate
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low

Calculated Risk Rating – High
7.5.3.9. Risk Management Measures

The first crucial step in the control of citrus canker is the adoption of nursery plants free of the
disease. Establishing windbreaks around citrus crops helps control the illness. Angular branches
with canker lesions can be pruned to remove over-seasoning inoculum. Large-scale citrus tree
destruction and the introduction of stringent international plant quarantine restrictions against
the virus are just two of the major efforts that have been undertaken to eradicate the illness (Goto,
7.5.3.10. References
Behlau, F., Belasque, J., Jr., Leite, R.P., Jr., Bergamin-Filho, A., Gottwald, T.R., Graham, J.H., Scandelai,
L.H.M., Primiano, I.V., Bassanezi, R.B. and Ayres, A.J. (2021a). Relative contribution of
windbreak, copper sprays, and leafminer control for citrus canker management and prevention
of crop loss in sweet orange trees. Plant Disease, 105(8) 2097-2105.
Ference, C.M., Gochez, A.M., Behlau, F., Wang, N., Graham, J.H. and Jones, J.B. (2018). Recent
advances in the understanding of Xanthomonas citri ssp. citri pathogenesis and citrus canker
disease management. Molecular Plant Pathology, 19(6) 1302-1318.
Goto, M. (1992). Citrus canker. In: Plant Diseases of International Importance, Vol. III, Diseases of Fruit
Crops, [ed. by Kumar, J., Chaube, H.S., Singh, U.S., Mukhopadhyay, A.N.]. Englewood Cliffs,
USA: Prentice Hall. 170-208.
Leduc, A., Traoré, Y.N., Boyer, K., Magne, M., Grygiel, P., Juhasz, C.C., Boyer, C., Guerin, F., Wonni,
I., Ouedraogo, L., Vernière, C., Ravigné, V. and Pruvost, O. (2015). Bridgehead invasion of a
monomorphic plant pathogenic bacterium: Xanthomonas citri pv. citri, an emerging citrus
pathogen in Mali and Burkina Faso. Environmental Microbiology, 17(11) 4429-4442.
Li, W.B., Song, Q.J., Brlansky, R.H. and Hartung, J.S. (2007). Genetic diversity of citrus bacterial canker
pathogens preserved in herbarium specimens. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 104 (47), 18427-18432.
Lin, H.C., Feng, C.Y., Chang, Y.A. and Chang, H. (2012). Molecular typing and genetic characterization
of pathogenic variants of Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri in Taiwan. Journal of
Phytopathology. 160 (9), 475-483.

Mirzaee, M.R. (2015). Citrus bacterial canker pustules are associated with leafminer galleries in Iran.
Journal of Plant Pathology, 97(1) 213.
Paola, R., Mariana, M., Raquel, d-C. and Mercedes, P. (2013). Characterization of Xanthomonas citri
sbsp. Strains. citrus, the causative agent of citrus cancer. (Caracterización de cepas de
Xanthomonas citri sbsp. citri, agente causal del cancro cítrico). Agrociencia. 17 (2), 64-74.
Ray, J.D., Taylor, R.K., Griffin, R.L., James, R.S., Dale, C., Ximines, A. and Jones, L.M., (2017).
Confirmation of Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri causing citrus canker in Timor-Leste.
Australasian Plant Disease Notes. 12 (1), 44.
Savitha, A.S., Ajithkumar, K., Palaiah, P. and Ramesh, G. (2016). Integrated management of citrus canker
caused by a Xnthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Hasse) in acid lime (Citrus auruntifolia). Pest
Management in Horticultural Ecosystems. 22 (2), 189-192.
Schaad, N.W., Postnikova, E., Lacy, G.H., Sechler, A., Agarkova, I., Stromberg, P.E., Stromberg, V.K.
and Vidaver, A.K. (2005). Reclassification of Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri (ex Hasse 1915)
Dye 1978 forms A, B/C/D, and E as X. smithii subsp. citri (ex Hasse) sp. nov. nom. rev. comb.
nov., X. fuscans subsp. aurantifolii (ex Gabriel 1989) sp. nov. nom. rev. comb. nov., and X.
alfalfae subsp. citrumelo (ex Riker and Jones) Gabriel et al., 1989 sp. nov. nom. rev. comb. nov.;
X. campestris pv. malvacearum (ex Smith 1901) Dye 1978 as X. smithii subsp. smithii nov. comb.
nov. nom. nov.; X. campestris pv. alfalfae (ex Riker and Jones, 1935) Dye 1978 as X. alfalfae
subsp. alfalfae (ex Riker et al., 1935) sp. nov. nom. rev.; and "var. fuscans" of X. campestris pv.
phaseoli (ex Smith, 1987) Dye 1978 as X. fuscans subsp. fuscans sp. nov. Systematic and Applied
Microbiology, 28(6) 494-518.

Chapter 8: Risk Management

8.1. Risk Management Options and Phytosanitary Procedures
Pest risk management evaluates and selects options for measurement to reduce the risk of entry,
establishment or spread of quarantine pests of the commodity—here, it is mango, to pose an
unacceptable level of risk to Bangladesh via the importation of commercially produced citrus
from exporting countries such as India, China, Thailand, Bhutan, South Africa, Egypt, Brazil
and Australia, or any other countries of citrus export (i.e., produced under standard cultivation,
harvesting and packing activities). Plant Quarantine Wing (PQW) of Department of Agricultural
Extension (DAE) of Bangladesh will consider the risk management measures proposed below is
commensurate with the identified risks:
8.1.1. Pre-harvest Management Options
The in-field, pest management practices for the production of mangoes are in brief:
• Pre-flowering pesticide treatments for arthropods, fungi and other pathogenic microorganisms those causing damage above threshold levels;
• Post-flowering and fruit pesticide treatments above threshold levels for specific pests such
as lemon butterfly, thrips, leaf miner, mealy bug, stem borer, and anthracnose, die-back,
black spot, sooty mold, powdery mildew, fruit rot, stem-end-rot, etc.;
• Use of Bordeaux-paste 10 percent on pruning wounds of gummosis infected trunk is
effective to reduce the gummosis disease in the orchard;
• Copper fungicide sprays (oxychloride, hydroxide, or oxide) must be administered against
scab and canker diseases as soon as the blooms begin to appear and continued until the
fruit has reached a size of around 50 percent;
• Specific acaricide such as propargite and bio-neem plus should be sprayed in the field
against red spider mite;
• Fruit bagging is effective to reduce fruit fly infestation, black spot, fruit rot and anthracnose
disease infection;
• Orchard hygiene which involves removal of fallen fruit under a Good Agricultural Practice
(GAP) scheme administered by Department of Agriculture Extension (DAE);
• Designated pest free places of production or production sites must be selected for the
management of citrus canker (Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri);
• Annual flooding of orchards along with nematicides to kill the nematodes that causing
diseases;
• Pre-harvest inspection with the involvement of relevant officers and inspectors from the
importing country and need to verify the cleaning and disinfecting of equipment and

storage used in citrus production. Laboratory testing the equipment and produces
periodically. Quarantine restrictions may be used to limit spread of diseases detected.
8.1.2. Post-Harvest Procedures
Citrus fruits including Citrus medica (Zara/Colombo Lebu varieties) should be routinely graded
and washed. The procedure is as follows:
1. Washing of harvested fruits with clean water mixed with 2.3% sodium orthophenylphenate and drying (likely to remove external arthropods and pathogens);
2. Sorting and grading to remove damaged, overripe, infested, or infected fruits from the
harvested fruit lot. The grading process is likely to remove fruit showing obvious signs
of fungal and bacterial disease;
3. Fruits are packed for disinfestation by irradiation in export cartons.
4. Monthly applications of copper oxychloride mixed with mancozeb are effective against
the majority of post-harvest illnesses such as anthracnose, fruit rot, etc.
8.1.3. Visual Inspection
Visual inspection of fruit occurs at several points during the routine production and post-harvest
pathway for citrus including Citrus medica. These include:
• In-field monitoring during the growing season
• Harvesting
• Post-washing, sorting and grading
• Packaging of fruit for treatment
• Packaging of fruit for export (if above differs from packaging for treatment)
• Visual phytosanitary inspection
A visual inspection at multiple points of the pathway provides opportunities to remove infested
and/or infected fruit and is considered an appropriate risk management option for regulated
organisms such as mealybugs, thrips, and scale insects as they are easily detected on the surface
of fruit.
8.1.4. Treatment for arthropods
The current pre- and post-harvest procedures are aimed at reducing regulated organism rather
than removing all risk associated with citrus from exporting countries. Therefore, a treatment
like vapour heat treatment (VHT) or irradiation is necessary to mitigate residual risk, especially
from internally feeding arthropods such as fruit fly. Vietnam exports vapor heat treated dragon
fruit to Japan (Vietnam Net/VNA, 2009) and irradiated dragon fruit to the USA. Irradiation is
used to control regulatory insects in exported fresh commodities.
8.1.5. Phytosanitary Inspection and Certification
Importing country requires a phytosanitary certificate issued by respective authority of exporting
country to accompany citrus exported from exporting country to importing country. Before a
phytosanitary certificate is issued, the respective authority of exporting country must conduct
phytosanitary inspection to ensure that the number of packaged fruits is consistent with the
number of disinfested fruits, traceability labelling is complete (including an official seal on the

sides of packages), packaging is insect-proof and that all other importing country requirements
have been met.
Where phytosanitary inspection occurs post-treatment (i.e., vapor heat treatment), the
disinfestation facility is suspended from export, if live arthropods are detected on inspection,
pending the results of an investigation.
8.1.6. Post-inspection Product Security
The importing country requires methods to be implemented to ensure post-inspection product
security include segregation of product, insect-proof packaging, insect screening of storage
facilities, at least yearly pre-season insecticide treatment of storage facility, and secure loading
and transport of fruit.
8.1.7. Verification inspection on arrival in importing country
• The respective authority of importing country may inspect a sample taken from each lot
on arrival in importing country to verify risk management actions undertaken were
effective. The sampling procedure must be in accordance with design followed by the
PQW-DAE of Bangladesh.
• If a treatment has failed, or regulated organisms, extraneous plant material or trash are
intercepted, one or more of the following actions must be undertaken:
o re-sorting of the consignment, treatment where an efficacious treatment is
available,
o re-shipment or destruction of the consignment and/or the temporary suspension
of the pathway on the detection of regulated organisms for which pre-export
phytosanitary measures are required.
o The suspension must continue until the cause of the non-compliance has been
identified and corrective actions have been implemented and approved by
respective authority of importing country.
8.1.8. Biosecurity clearance
If regulated pests are not detected, or are successfully treated following interception/detection,
and there is no evidence to suggest the plant material is propagatable, biosecurity clearance
should be given.
8.1.9. Audit and review of Policy
(a) Auditing: The Quarantine Department of the importing country must monitor interceptions
of hitchhikers and the appropriateness/effectiveness of phytosanitary measures on the
commencement of trade.
(b) Review of Policy: The importing country reserves the right to review the adopted policy at
any time after significant trade has occurred or where there is reason to believe that the
phytosanitary status of the exporting country has changed.

8.1.10. Feedback on non-compliance
The NPPO will be informed by the Director, Plant Quarantine Wing of DAE, Bangladesh, of the
interception (and treatment) of any regulated pests, “unlisted” pests, or non-compliance with
other phytosanitary requirements.
8.2. Risk Management Conclusions
All the pests assessed requires mitigative measures, however, due to the diverse nature of these
pests, it is unlikely that a single mitigative measure will be adequate to reduce the risk to
acceptable levels. Consequently, a combination of measures is being suggested as a feasible
approach.
8.3. Recommendation
•
Visual inspection at ports-of-entry for high-risk potential pests is insufficient to safeguard
the citrus industry in Bangladesh and thus the specific phytosanitary measures are
strongly recommended.
•
While for moderate risk potential pests, specific phytosanitary measures may be
necessary to reduce pest risk.
•
PRA for potential crops should be continued and updated with regular interval to
maintain and develop the market access of Bangladesh by fulfilling the requirement of
importing countries in the world.