Fourth Edition
Department of Agricultural Extension
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MANUAL

Publication of English Edition
Overall Coordination of 4th Edition
Coordination of English Edition
Composition and Compilation
Translator and Editor of English Edition
Publisher
In Collaboration with
Design and Print
February 2018
Krishibid Md. Hamidur Rahman
Former Director General, Department of Agricultural Extension
Mir Nurul Alam
Director (In Charge), Planning, Project implementation and ICT Wing
Department of Agricultural Extension
Md. Wasiuzzaman Akonda, Former Director, Department of Agricultural Extension
Rabindra Kumar Mazumder, Former Additional Director, Department of Agricultural Extension
Piyush Kanti Sarker, Former Director, Department of Agricultural Extension
Dr. Benoy Chandra Sen, Former Additional Director, Department of Agricultural Extension
Dr. Md. Hasan Kabir, Director, Bangla Academy
Dr. Muhammad Mizanur Rahman, Director (In Charge), Bangla Academy
Md. Moshir Uddin, Deputy Director, (ICT Management), PPIICTW, Department of Agricultural Extension
Amiruzzaman, Communications Specialist
Department of Agricultural Extension
Khamarbari, Dhaka-1215
www.dae.gov.bd
Katalyst
House 20, Road 6, Baridhara, Dhaka 1212
Arka
3/1, Flat-6C, Block-F, Lalmatia, Dhaka-1207
Fourth Edition
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION MANUAL

Agriculture has always been the main driving force behind Bengal’s heritage and socio-economic
development. The energy from food, of life itself, of labour and intellect shares strong links and a single
source of origin agriculture. More than 45% of the country's labour force is involved with the
agriculture sector. Therefore, the development of the country is dependent on the overall
development of agriculture.
Upon forming Government in the 1996-2001, Jananetri Sheikh Hasina brought the country near to selfsufficiency in food grain production. Recognizing her contributions, United Nation's Food and
Agriculture Organization awarded her the CERES Medal in 1999. Under the dynamic and visionary
leadership of the Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, the present people's government has
prioritized the agriculture sector and increased allocation of national budget in agriculture along with
higher subsidies on fertilizer, insecticide, fuel and electricity. Moreover, aiming to facilitate the
innovation of modern agro-technologies and their extensions, several projects are undertaken to
strengthen agriculture education, research and development. As modern, scientific agriculture
methods are replacing the archaic agricultural models, agricultural yield has increased and developed
and has now turned into a commercial sector.
Today agriculture sector is facing diverse challenges. Reduction of cultivable land, population boom,
increase in cost of production etc. are hindering development of agriculture as a whole. Besides,
climate change across the globe, especially global warming, is worsening the scenario. Given this
situation, what we need to help farmers to meet their requirement by improving skills of officials of all
tiers at DAE, ensuring professionalism and achieving technical know-how. I am happy that, to address
the challenges of changing scenario in agriculture, the Agricultural Extension Manual 1999 (Revised) is
being updated to Agricultural Extension Manual 2016. I believe that the Agricultural Extension Manual
2016, which is aligned to the ‘National Agricultural Extension Policy 2016’ (under revision), would help
increase professionalism and skills of DAE and at the same time develop the country’s agriculture
sector.
Strengthening partnership and better coordination among organisations that extend agricultural
extension services and improvement of quality of service will be made possible through effective use of
-
Minister
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Message

the Agricultural Extension Manual 2016. I hope this manual will contribute immensely ensuring DAE’s
quality of the services through partnership, and linking market with extension, research, education,
farmer and agriculture in coming days. I expect that the updated Agricultural Extension Manual 2016
will not only strengthen DAE’s current and future extension activities to meet the challenge of
increasing population set against reducing agricultural land, but also assist in development of export
oriented commerce with surplus agricultural products.
In this auspicious month of victory, I hereby respectfully remember 30 lac martyrs, sacrifices of 2 lac
women and unforgettable contributions of the freedom fighters who paved the way to the formation of
an independent sovereign Bangladesh.
I extend my heartiest gratitude to everyone involved in updating the manual.
Joy Bangla, Joy Bangabandhu
May Bangladesh live forever.
(Matia Chowdhury MP)
* Translated from Bangla

Bangladesh has made immense development in agriculture sector. The Department of
Agricultural Extension is playing a significant role in developing Bangladesh’s agriculture. To
meet the challenging need, the publication of Agricultural Extension Manual 2016 as an
update to the Agricultural Extension Manual 1999 in alignment with the ‘National Agricultural
Extension Policy 2016’ (under review) is an admirable initiative.
The Agricultural Extension Manual 2016 is published with a view to addressing the existing
needs in the field. The manual incorporates direction's of implementing policies relevant to
‘Revised Extension Approaches’, application of e-extension services, guidelines on
management of agricultural extension with accountability. It also details realistic guidelines,
and outlines the duties and responsibilities of extension officials on how to strengthen
extension services through partnership. Sections of the manual on need-based programme
plans for farmers, monitoring and evaluation of completed projects will also strengthen the
quality of extension work.
I sincerely appreciate everyone involved in the publication of this manual.
Senior
Mohammad Moinuddin Abdullah
Secretary
Senior Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Message

The agriculture of Bangladesh is one of the main forces to take the country towards its goal of
establishing Bangladesh globally as a middle income country by 2021 and a developed and
prosperous country by 2041. Following the government’s vision, agriculture is now set to face a
transformation that will be benefitting the nation as a whole. At DAE, we are prepared and
dedicated ourselves to support the farmers of our country, who forms the main engine of
agricultural goal, in anyway possible.
Our beloved country faces challenges such reducing availability of cultivable land, adverse
effect of climate change, increased international competition and growing demand of food
grains as a result of growing population. On the other hand, opportunities have risen in form of
demand in nutritious and safe food, advancement of agricultural and communication
technology and international trade, increased income of people in agriculture through
agribusiness. The changing scenarios, to address challenges and harness the opportunities, we
have prepared ourselves both technically and administratively.
Our 25000-strong workforce is now more qualified and motivated with the technological
advancement and improved process. To make ourselves more attuned with the challenges and
opportunities, we have successfully developed the Agricultural Extension Manual 4th Edition
since 2016. We have successfully introduced the Bangla version of the manual and our
workforce has accepted it wholeheartedly.
We, at DAE, believe that the beneficial agriculture extension work is a culmination of important
partnerships with various stakeholders. And it is also an ever developing science. To support our
mission, and to promote partnership as well as to introduce DAE to international platform, we
have translated the Agricultural Extension Manual 4th Edition to English. As English is the lingua
franca, through this version, wider agriculture community will learn more about DAE and learn
about its workforce. The translated version will also allow students and faculty members of
academia to learn about us and research more on modern agricultural extension practices.
Message of
Director General

Finally, my especial thanks to Planning, Project implementation and ICT Wing and Katalyst for
their support to bring this into reality. I hope that the wider agriculture extension community
including international partners and members from academia will perceive the manual
wholeheartedly and collectively we will attain our vision.
Krishibid Mohammad Mohsin
Director General
Department of Agricultural Extension

Agriculture in Bangladesh is modernising to address the country’s need to develop and grow
both to support our subsistence and economic growth following our government’s goal.
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) is working tirelessly to form the main supporting
arm to assist the farmers who are the main force of our agricultural sector. As DAE is the
largest and most effective agriculture extension service provider, the Agricultural Extension
Manual is the key document to provide direction to the workforce consisting members over
25000 personnel. In 2016, DAE accomplished an important task of revising and publishing the
manual for the 4th time. In relation to that progress, as this is a key document, we felt the need
to publish the manual in English.
As we live in the era of partnerships, we need not only to reach our workforce efficiently but
also to reach our partners. The manual will play a strong role in reaching international
community who play a strong supportive role in agricultural development of our country. This
version will also be useful for grassroot level extensionist, who provides the future of the
agriculture extension force and supports through bringing technological innovation and
advancements.
The manual has been translated by The Planning, Project Implementation and ICT wing of DAE
with support from Katalyst. It has gone through various stages of translation and editing by
competent authority of Bangla Academy. I am thankful to the original writers as well as to the
translators, editors and publisher for bringing the English version of The Agricultural
Extension Manual 4th Edition into a reality.
Mir Nurul Alam
Director (In Charge)
Planning, Project implementation and ICT Wing
Prelude to English Edition of

In the land once belonging to the Indian subcontinent currently named as Bangladesh,
although the history of the beginning of agricultural extension program is very old, the
introduction of modern agricultural extension service in this country started in the 70’s after
its independence through the Great Liberation War. At that time, to create a hunger- free
nation, the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman undertook initiatives
for massive structural and procedural reformation of all relevant institutions with the system
of agricultural education, research, extension and management of machineries within the
very short time. Consequently, modern agricultural extension service program was
implemented by wide inclusion of the farmer society with the advent of ‘Training and Visit’
approach. As instructions for field level implementation of this program, the ‘Agricultural
Extension Manual’ was published for the first time in 1982. The second edition of which was
published in 1985. Both of the editions were in English.
The characteristics of the ‘Training and Visit’ approach was implemented on principle of
implementation based on including farmers from all classes through formulation action plan,
performing tasks with accountability and adopting participative policy and provide
encouragement according to the change in demands of various services. In 1996, through
application of ‘Revised Extension Methodology’ the Department of Agricultural Extension
became active in implementing the New Agriculture Extension policy. In this Agriculture
Extension Policy “DAE Mission” were clearly outlined for the first time and third edition of the
‘Agricultural Extension Manual’ was published in January, 1999 accordingly with assistance of
ASIRP project. Both Bengali and English versions were prepare for this edition.
Almost 17 years have passed and to make the agriculture program swift, that is due to
inclusion of some new elements such as- increasing agricultural productivity,
commercialisation of agriculture, managing climate change risk, cultivation of nutritious and
safe food, marketing, initial processing of agricultural commodities,
Increasing exports, using advanced technology, farm mechanization, advancement of
effective and water-saving irrigation system, integrated crop production system, integrated
Preface

farm management system, implementation of Good Agricultural Practice and Organic
Agricultural Technology, minimizing losses through development of post-harvest
management, participation of women in agriculture, implementation of ICT in agriculture, it
had become extremely necessary to develop the manual and make it up-to-date. From this
need the initiative of updating the ‘Agricultural Extension Manual’ has been undertaken.
Agri-business for Trade Competitiveness Project (ATC-P), branded as Katalyst, a development
partner has extended the hand of support to the Department of Agricultural Extension in
implementing this initiative. To update the manual, the officials of the Department of
Agricultural Extension and their team of experts have worked relentlessly. The current version
of the Agricultural Extension Manual has been developed by the opinions from all relevant
stakeholders including the experienced senior and retired officials of the field, men and
women farmers from various categories, agricultural scientists, BADC officials, NGO
representatives and agricultural input and machinery traders. That is why it is informative,
objective, timely and compatible with changing circumstances. Hopefully, this manual will
play a significant and effective role in developing the skills and application of the professionals
in the agricultural extension service. I express my sincere gratitude to all those involved in the
publication of this manual's updated edition.
My expectation is that the agricultural extension workers from all levels of the Department of
Agricultural Extension will perceive the manual wholeheartedly and contribute to the
development of agriculture by reflecting it in their workplace.
Director General
Department of Agricultural Extension
Krishibid Md. Hamidur Rahman
* Krishibid Md. Hamidur Rahman is former Director General of DAE and head of content committee formed to
develop the Agricultural Extension Manual

* Krishibid Md. Monzurul Hannan was Director of Administration and Finance Wing
manual in December 2016, later he was also Director General of DAE. He was also Head of Finance, Workplan
and Budget committee formed to develop manual in 2016.
during publication of the
Our country is faced with the challenges of reducing cultivable land and growing need of food and
nutrition. Increase in food production requires application of suitable technology and effective
extension work. In a nutshell, there is no alternative to extension services for development of farmers
and agriculture. Moreover, climate change and the changing needs of farmers need to be addressed
through modernised extension work and improved technical knowledge. To strengthen the agricultural
extension work, extension professionals including senior officials of Department of Agricultural
Extension were directly or indirectly involved in updating the Agriculture Extension Manual 1999 and
publishing the Agricultural Extension Manual 2016. It is impossible to name all the names – however, I
must thankfully acknowledge the support received from Additional Secretary (Extension) of the
Ministry of Agriculture Mr. Md. Mosharrof Hossain along with relevant officials.
A team of experts were directly involved in developing and publishing of Agricultural Extension Manual
2016. The team was led by Mr. Wasiuzzaman Akonda with members Mr. Rabindra Kumar Mazumder,
Mr. Pijush Kanti Sarker and Dr. Benoy Chandra Sen. Their continuous efforts and efforts of other
relevant officials have made it possible to update the Agricultural Extension Manual. I express my
sincere gratitude towards the team.
The team has conducted workshops, discussion sessions, and surveys with farmers, officials, personnel
of several tiers and other sectors at both local and national level to collect inputs to develop and to
publish updated Agricultural Extension Manual 2016. Finally, with consolidation of the input with the
feedback from Ministry of Agriculture, the manual has been prepared. I hereby gratefully thank
everyone in the regional and national levels for extending their valuable contributions and inputs.
The final draft of the Manual was minutely reviewed by high officials of both the Ministry of Agriculture
and the Department of Agricultural Extension alongside former Director Generals, Directors and experts
of the Department of Agricultural Extension. Special thanks and heartfelt appreciations to them for
offering adequate time and extending valuable technical assistance.
Finally, special thanks to everyone at Katalyst for thoroughly supporting with the update and
publication process of the Agricultural Extension Manual 2016.
Md. Monzurul Hannan
Director, Administration and Finance Wing
Department of Agricultural Extension
Acknowledgement

Direct contribution in updating the 'Agricultural Extension Manual 2016'
was made by (not in order of seniority*)
Kridhibid Protip Kumar Mondal, Former Director, Planning, Project Implementation
and ICT Wing
Kridhibid Md. Abul Kalam Azad, Former Director, Plant Protection Wing
Kridhibid Md. Golam Mostofa, Former Director, Crops Wing
Kridhibid S.M. Abu Zaar, Former Director, Horticulture Wing
Kridhibid Md. Abdul Mazid, Former Director, Training Wing
Kridhibid Md. Manzurul Hannan, Director, Admin & Finance Wing
Kridhibid Chaitanya Kumar Das, Director, Field Services Wing
Kridhibid Shoumen Saha, Director, Plant Quarantine Wing
Kridhibid Md. Nuruzzaman, Additional Director, Planning, Project Implementation
and ICT Wing
10. Kridhibid Md. Mobarak Ali,Project Director, Safe Crop Production through Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) Project
11. Kridhibid Dr. Abu Wali Raghib Hassan, Additional Director, Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT Wing
12. Kridhibid Suvash Chandra Gayen, Additional Director, Crops Wing
13. Kridhibid Md. Qudrat-E-Ghoni, Additional Director, Horticulture Wing
14. Kridhibid A.Z.M. Sabbir Ibna Jahan, Additional Director, Plant Protection Wing
15. Krishibid Mizanur Rahman,Director, Agriculture Information Service
16. Krishibid Kazi Md. Shaiful Islam, Deputy Director (Extension), Field Services Wing
17. Krishibid Dr. Mohammad Abduhu, Deputy Director (Monitoring), Field Services Wing
18. Krishibid Md. Muksedur Rahman, Deputy Director (Fertilizer), Field Services Wing
19. Krishibid Dr. Md. Nurul Islam, Deputy Director (ICT Management), Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT Wing
20. Krishibid Md. Sheikh Farid,Deputy Director (Project Evaluation and Monitoring)
Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing
21. Krishibid Md. Moazzem Hossain, Deputy Director (Personnel), Administration and
Finance Wing
Krishibid Dr. Md. Khaled Kamal, Deputy Director (LR), Administration and Finance Wing
23. Krishibid Mrityunjoy Roy, Deputy Project Director, IFMC Project
24. Krishibid Md. Khairul Alam (Prince), Deputy Director (Farmer Training), Training Wing
25. Krishibid Dr. Md. Jahangir Alam, Deputy Director (Mass Communication), Agricultural
Information Service
26. Krishibid Mohammed Qamrul Haque, Deputy Director (Diploma Education) Training
Wing
27. Krishibid S. M. Borhan Uddin Ahmed, Deputy Director (Foreign Training) Training Wing
* Details collected in December 2016

28. Krishibid Lubna Rahman, Assistant Chief, Training Wing
29. Krishibid Md. Abu Sadeque, Deputy Director (Import), Plant Quarantine Wing
30. Krishibid Dr. Mohammad Ali, Deputy Director, Crops Wing
31. Krishibid S M Fazlul Karim Sani, Deputy Director (Pesticide Admin), Plant Protection
Wing
32. Krishibid Md. Rezaul Islam, Deputy Director (IPM), Plant Protection Wing
33. Krishibid Md. Fakhrul Hassan, Deputy Director, Plant Protection Wing
34. Krishibid S. Tasaddeque Ahmed, Project Director, Farmer Training for Technology
Transfer at Upazila level
35. Krishibid Md. Nazrul Islam, Project Director, Farmers level Production, Preservation
and Distribution of High yielding Seed of Pulse, Oil-seed and Onion Project
36. Krishibid Md. Moshir Uddin, Additional Deputy Director, DAE, Shariatpur
37. Krishibid Dr. Farida Perveen, Additional Deputy Director (Inputs), Field Services Wing
38. Krishibid Masuma Younus, Production Economist, Planning, Project Implementation
and ICT Wing
39. Krishibid Dr. G M. Faruk (Dawn), Former Additional Deputy Director (Admin),
Administration and Finance Wing
40. Krishibid Dr. Md. Abdul Hossain, Additional Deputy Director, (PS to DG), Administration
and Finance Wing
41. Krishibid Dr. Md. Moniruzzaman, Additional Deputy Director (Admin), Administration
and Finance Wing
42. Krishibid Md. Ferdaus Ahmed, Additional Deputy Director, Administration and
finance Wing
43. Krishibid Shakil Arvin Zomo, Additional Deputy Director, Crops wing
44. Krishibid Zuairia Sultana, Additional Deputy Director, Crops wings
45. Krishibid Dr. A K M Shameem Alam, Additional Deputy Director Horticulture Wing
46. Krishibid Mahbuba Moonmoon, Additional Deputy Director (Horticulture Wing
47. Krishibid Dr. Md. Azhar Ali, Additional Director, Plant Quarantine Wing
48. Krishibid Dr. Ratan Chandra Dey, Additional Deputy Director (LR), Administration and
Finance Wing
49. Krishibid Anjan Chandra Mandal, Additional Deputy Director (Import) Plant
Quarantine Wing
50. Krishibid Kamrun Nahar, Additional Deputy Director, (Export), Plant Quarantine Wing,
51. Krishibid Md. Ahasanul Haque Chowdhury, Quarantine Entomologist, Plant
Quarantine Wing,
52. Krishibid Md. Mohidur Rahman, Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control)
53. Krishibid Md. Ataur Rahman, Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control),
Plant Protection Wing
54. Krishibid Md. Arman Haider, Additional Deputy Director, Plant Quarantine Wing
55. Krishibid Mukhlasur Rahman, Additional Deputy Director. Plant Protection Wing

Katalyst Associates
Former officials of the Department of Agricultural Extension and Agriculture
Related Organization (not in order of seniority)
Nasir Ahmed
Tahsin Akbar
Krishibid A. K. M. Tafsir Siddiqui, Director General
Krishibid M. Enamul Haque, Director General
Krishibid Md. Ibrahim Khalil, Director General
Krishibid Mukul Chandra Roy, Director General
Krishibid Anil C. Sarker, Director General
Krishibid A.H. M. Matior Rahman, Director
Krishibid Md. Abdul Baten, Director
Krishibid Md. Nazrul Islam, Director
Krishibid Md. Fazlul Haque, Director
10. Krishibid A H Iqbal Ahmed, Director
11. Krishibid Syed Fazlul Karim Dewan, Director
12. Krishibid Saiyed Majed Ali, Director
13. Krishibid M. A. Salam, Director
14. Krishibid Shachindra Ch. Debnath, Director
15. Krishibid Dr. Shahidul Islam, Director
16. Krishibid Jasimuddin Ahmed, Deputy Director
17. Krishibid Md. Rafiqul Islam Mollah, Deputy Director
18. Krishibid Dr. ANM Waliullah, Deputy Director
19. Krishibid Saleh Ahmed, Deputy Director

Greetings
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Department of Agricultural Extension
(DAE) and its officials on successfully updating the Extension Manual. This marks the beginning of
a new era for Bangladesh’s agriculture extension service officials, as they will now be better
equipped with an updated manual to provide services to larger number of farmers.
We at Agribusiness for Trade Competitiveness Project (ATC-P, branded as Katalyst) are proud of
our association with the DAE, in updating this manual. The mandate of Katalyst is to enhance the
income of the poor farmers of Bangladesh through facilitating access to inputs, information and
other essential services in a sustainable manner. We believe that, this revised version of the
manual – which incorporates collective experiences from DAE, the private sector, NGOs, senior
extension officers and farmers – will be a milestone in further developing the capacity of DAE
extension officers. The updated manual also includes many new developments in modern
agriculture, which we feel will be immensely useful to the DAE field officers.
Katalyst is confident that this manual will better serve the needs of DAE in supporting and
promoting agricultural sector in Bangladesh for many years to come.
Markus Ehmann
General Manager

Agricultural Extension Manual xix
Content
Message from Minister, Ministry of Agriculture
Message from Senior Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture
Message of Director General
Prelude to English Edition of Agriculture Extension Manual
Preface
Acknowledgement
Greetings from Katalyst
Abbreviation
1.1
Introduction to Agricultural Extension Approach
1.2
Revised Extension Approach
1.3
Policies Relating Revised Extension Approach
1.4
Applying Revised Extension Approach to Extension Planning Cycle
1.5
Conditions of Effective and Fruitful Extension Approach
1.6
Following Revised Extension Approach Policies in all Development
Projects or Programs of the Department of Agricultural Extension
2.1
Extension as an Integrated Management
2.2
Reformed Organizational Structure of the Department of
Agricultural Extension
2.3
Responsibilities of the Wings of the Department of Agricultural Extension
2.4
Monitoring and Supervision of Field-Level Extension Work by all Heads of Wings
2.5
Activities Management Committee of DAE
2. 6
Co-ordination Committee of DAE
2.7
Finding Ways for Strengthening Extension Works in Departmental
Meetings at the District or Regional Level
2.8
Seasonal Workshop on Crop Production and Extension Planning
at National levels
2.9
Project Preparation Mainstreaming and Follow-Up of Project
Activities in DAE
2.10 Annual Performance Agreement
2.11 Extension Services Responsive to Crop zoning or Environment
2.12 Extension Management in the Event of Natural Disaster
2.13 Observing 'Agricultural Extension Week'
Chapter 1 Agricultural Extension Approach
Chapter 2 Management of Agricultural Extension

2.14 Role of Extension Work in the Management of Agricultural Inputs
2.15 Agricultural Input Assistance Card
2.16 Farmer's Bank Account
2.17 Complaint Centres for Addressing Problems and Complaints
and Flow of Information
2.18 LinkageBetween Extension and Other Institutions
2.19 Modernisation in Extension Activities
2.20 Strengthening of Female Farmer's Participation in Extension Work
2.21 DAE’s Increased Engagement in Essential Activities Including
Pest Surveillance and Pest Management
2.22 Skill Development
2.23 Fortnightly Visit Schedule of Sub-Assistant Agricultural
Officers (SAAO) and Their Training
2.24 Ensuring Accountability in Extension Work
2.25 Performance Report by All DAE Officials
2.26 Evaluation of Officials’ Performance and Awards
2.27 Monitoring, Supervision and Administrative Management
2.28 Formation of Quality Improvement Cell for Extension Services
2.29 DAE’s Information Management to Strengthen Programmes
Supportive to Extension Work
2.30 Following Government Policies, Laws and Rules in Extension Work
3.1
Vision and Mission
3.2
Promise of Services
3.3
What We Expect from You
3.4
Grievance Resolve System (GRS)
5.1
Partnership and Its Importance to the Agricultural Extension
5.2
Purpose of Working in Partnership:
5.3
Types of Partnership
5.4
Public-Private Ownership (PPP)
5.5
Strategies of Extension Partnership
Chapter 3 Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing
Citizen Rights
Chapter 4 The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension
Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension
Chapter 5 Partnerships
Content
xx

5.6
Coordination Meeting of Organisations Under Ministry of
Agriculture Encourage Partnership
5.7
DAE’s Role in the Development and Maintainance of Partnership
5.8
Benefits of Partnership
6.1
Background
6.2
Benefits of Working with Farmer Groups
6.3
Limitations of Working with Farmer Groups
6.4
Farmer Groups with Which DAE would Work
6.5
Description of Farmer Groups Formed by DAE
6.6
Allocation of Groups in Block
6.7
Formation or Reformation of Farmer Groups
6.8
Block-wise Farmer Group Number and Number of Members Groups
6.9
Possible Ways to Make the Group Effective and Sustainable
6.10 Skill of Extension Worker to Work with Farmer Groups
7.1
Background
7.2
Methods of Farmers Information- Need Assessment
7.3
Inter-Personal Communication to Manage Extension Work
7.4
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA)
7.5
Problem Census
7.6
Survey
7.7
Reviewing SAAO's Diary
7.8
Meeting and View-Exchange with Organisations Related to Extension Services 156
7.9
Remote Sensing
8.1
Definition and Objectives of Planning
8.2
Importance of DAE's Agricultural Extension Planning
8.3
Making of Extension Plans
8.4
Planning of Annual Performance Agreement (APA)
8.5
Planning for the Development of Human Resources Connected
to Agricultural Extension Work
8.6
Input Management Plans
8.7
Making the Project Plans of the Department of Extension
8.8
Risk Management Planning
Chapter 6 Working With Farmer Groups
Chapter 7 Farmer's Information Need Assessment
Chapter 8 Making Extension Plans
xxi

Chapter 9 Human Resource Development
Chapter 10 Selecting Extension Methods
Chapter 11 Extension Methods Based on Farmer's
Group or Organisations
9.1
Introduction
9.2
Importance of Training in Agricultural Extension
9.3
Training Methods
9.4
Assessing the Competence of Extension Workers
9.5
Increasing the Competence of Extension Workers
9.6
Role of DAE Headquarter in Developing Human Resources
9.7
Training Management at District Levels
9.8
Training Management at the Upazila Level
9.9
Learning Resource Centres at the District and Upazila Level
9.10 Assets Needed at DAE Field Offices to Ensure Standard Services
9.11 Encouraging Extension Workers for Skill Development and
Conducting Evaluation
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Individual Extension Methods
10.3 Adopting New Technologies
11.1 Demonstration
11.2 Field Day
11.3 District or Upazila Fair
11.4 Farm Walks
11.5 Farmer Rallies
11.6 Folk Media
11.7 Meetings with Members of Farmers’ Groups or Organisations
11.8 Yard Meetings
11.9 Farmers’ Clubs
11.10 Inquiring about Agriculture or Krishi Ziggasha
11.11 Motivational Tours
11.12 Participatory Technology Development
11.13 Formal Training day
11.14 Farmer’s Field School
xxii
Content

Chapter 12 Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids
Chapter 13 Monitoring and Evaluation
Chapter 14 Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High
Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions
Chapter 15 Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change
12.1 Electronic Media
12.2 Print Media, and Audio-visual Aids
13.1 Introduction
13.2 Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in Planning Processes
13.3 Rules of Monitoring
13.4 SAAO Diary
13.5 Mobile Monitoring
13.6 Monitoring Field Work Through Telephone or Mobile Phone or Mobile Apps
13.7 Technology Extension Monitoring System (TEMS)
13.8 Knowledge, Attitude and Practices Survey (KAP)
13.9 Selection of Technologies and Compilation of Key Points of the Technology
13.10 Collection of Participants' Records and Selection of Samples
13.11 Creation of Survey form and Pre- testing
13.12 Interviewing the Farmers
13.13 Impact Assessment System (IAS)
14.1 The Haor Region
14.2 Hill Region
14.3 High Barind Regions
14.4 Char Areas
14.5 South and South-western Regions
15.1 Causes of Climate Change
15.2 Effects of Climate Change in Bangladesh
15.3 Emergency Disaster Management Actions for Extension Workers
15.4 Keeping Emergency Support Functional during Disasters
15.5 Reduction of Disaster Risks and Climate Change Impacts on
Agriculture via Adaptation Techniques and Management
xxiii

15.6 Actions Required during, Pre- and Post-Disaster Times
15.7 Necessary Actions for Agriculture During Drought
15.8 Actions Necessary in the Event of Flood and Flash Flood
15.9 Measures to be Taken for Agriculture in Saline-Prone Region
15.10 Effects of Flood, Drought, Salinity and Other Calamities on Agriculture
16.1 Introduction
16.2 Gender Discrimination: Global and Bangladesh Perspectives
16.3 National Agriculture Policy and Women Farmers
16.4 Policy for Advancement of Women in the Agriculture Sector
16.5 Extension Approaches for Strengthening Women's Participation in Agriculture 292
16.6 Extending Services to Women Farmers
17.1 Introduction
17.2 Necessity of e-Extension
17.3 Benefits of e-Extension Services
17.4 DAE's Considerations for e-Extension
17.5 The Existing e-Extension Eervices
17.6 Website of Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE): www.dae.gov.bd
17.7 Increase of Farmers’ and SAAO’s Ability for Successful e-Extension Service
18.1 DAE's Measures in Addressing Challenges and the Present
Scenario of the Development of the Agriculture Sector
18.2 Future Challenges in the Development of Agriculture
Table 1
Classification of Farmers Based on Size of Land
Table 2
Minimum Monthly Field Visits for Supervision by Officials
Table 3
Description of Farmer Groups Formed Under Different Projects of the
Department of Agricultural Extension
Table 4
Level of Competence of Extension Workers
Table 5
Local Variety of Rice in the Haor Region
Chapter 16 Participation of Women in Agriculture Extension
Chapter 17 e-Extension Services
Chapter 18 Challenges in Agricultural Extension
List of Table
xxiv Content

List of Figure
Appendix
Figure 1
Extension Planning Cycle
Figure 2
Organogram of Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE)
Figure 3
Flow of Information in the Department of Agricultural Extension
Figure 4
Linkage Among Extension, Research, Education, Farmer and the Market
Figure 5
Types of Partnerships are Briefly Described Below
Figure 6
Steps of Problem Census
Figure 7
Outline of Extension Work Based on Farmers’ Information-Need
Appendix 1 Comparision of Various Extension Approach
A 3
Appendix 2 New Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP)
A 9
Appendix 3 Some Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) Techniques
A 26
Appendix 4
A 29
Programme Planning Form
Appendix 4 (B) Annual Extension Programe Planning Form
A 30
Appendix 5 (A) `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`bv Pzw3 msμvšÍ bxwZgvjv 2016-17
A 31
Appendix 5 (B) gvV ch©v‡hi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Pzw3 msμvšÍ bxwZgvjv 2016-17
A 41
Appendix 5 (C) evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 dig 2015-16
A 50
Appendix 6 Annual Competence Assessment Form
A 64
Appendix 7 Technology Extension Monitoring System (Tems):
A 67
Tems Form 1- Primary Monitoring Form
Appendix 8 Impact Assessment System: IAS Form 1
A 76
(A) Dtermination Of Objectives For Annual Extension
xxv

Abbreviation
xxvi
Abbreviation
AAEO
: Assistant Agricultural Extension Officer
AAO
: Additional Agricultural Officer
ACR
: Annual Confidential Report
AD
: Additional Director
ADD
: Additional Deputy Director
ADP
: Annual Development Programme
AEC
: Agricultural Extension Component
AEO
: Agricultural Extension Officer
AEZ
: Agro-ecological Zone
AICC
: Agricultural Information and Communication Centre
AIS
: Agriculture Information Service
APA
: Annual Performance Agreement
ASIRP
: Agricultural Services Innovation and Reform Project
ASSSRBP
: Agricultural Support for Smallholders in South-Western Region of
Bangladesh Project
ATC
: Agricultural Technical Committee
ATI
: Agricultural Training Institute
AWD
: Alternate Wetting and Drying
BADC
: Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation
BARC
: Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
BBS
: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
BCIC
: Bangladesh Chemical Industries Corporation
BIID
: Bangladesh Institute of ICT in Development
BRRI
: Bangladesh Rice Research Institute
BTRC
: Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission
CFS
: Community Farmers’ School
CLP
: Char Livelihood Programme
CPR
: Crop Production Report
DAE
: Department of Agricultural Extension
DATCC
: District Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee
DCRMA
: Disaster and Climate Risk Management in Agriculture
DD
: Deputy Director
DECC
: District Extension Coordination Committee

DEPC
: District Extension Planning Committee
DFID
: Department for International Development)
DG
: Director General
DTC
: District Technical Committee (DATCC)
EIA
: Environmental Impact Assessment
EPICC
: Extension Planning Implementation Coordination Committee
FAO
: Food and Agriculture Organisation
FFS
: Farmers’ Field School
FIAC
: Farmers Information and Advice Centre
FINA
: Farmers’ Information Need Assessment
GAP
: Good Agricultural Practice
GIS
: Geographical Information System
GO
: Government Organisation
GPF
: General Provident Fund
GRS
: Grievance Redress System
IANFP
: Integrated Agricultural Approach for Ensuring Nutrition and Food
Security Project
IAPP
: Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project
IAS
: Impact Assessment System
ICM
: Integrated Crop Management
ICT
: Information and Communication Technology
IFMC
: Integrated Farm Management Component
IFPRI
: International Food Policy Research Institute
IP
: Import Permit
IPM
: Integrated Pest Management
IPPC
: International Plant Protection Convention
IRRI
: International Rice Research Institute
KAP
: Knowledge, Attitude and Practice
LAN
: Local Agribusiness Network
LC
: Letter of Credit
LFS
: Landless Farmers’ School
LLP
: Low Lift Pump
MDG
: Millennium Development Goal
MRL
: Maximum Residual Limit
NAEP
: New Agricultural Extension Policy
NATA
: National Agricultural Training Academy
xxvii

NATCC
: National Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee
NATP
: National Agricultural Technology Project
NECC
: National Extension Coordination Committee
NGO
: Non-Governmental Organisation
NPPO
: National Plant Protection Organisation
NTC
: National Technical Committee (NATCC)
PC
Phytosanitary Certificate
PC
: Problem Census
PDC
: Para Unnayan Kandra (cvov Dbœqb †K›`a)
PKSF
: Palli Karma Sahayak Foundation
PPI
: Public Private Initiative
PPM
: Plant Protection Mokaddem
PPP
: Public Private Partnership
PRA
: Participatory Rural Appraisal
PS to DG
: Personal Secretary to Director General
PTAC
: Pesticide Technical Advisory Committee
PTD
: Participatory Technology Development
RADP
: Revised Annual Development Programme
RATCC
: Regional Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee
REA
: Revised Extension Approach
RICC
: Research Institute Coordination Committee
RTC
: Regional Technical Committee (RATCC)
SAAO
: Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officer
SAPPO
: Sub-Assistant Plant Protection Officer
SCDP
: Second Crop Diversification Project
SCPP-IPM
: Safe Crop Production Project through IPM Approach
SDG
: Sustainable Development Goal
SFG
: Small Farmers’ Group
SMS
: Short Message Service
SPARRSO
: Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization
SPPS
: Strengthening Plant Protection Services
SRDI
: Soil Resource Development Institute
SRI
: System of Rice Intensification
SRO
: Statutory Regulatory Order
T & V
: Training and Visit
TFP
: Total Factor Productivity
xxviii Abbreviation

TIN
: Tax Identification Number
TO & E
: Table of Oganogram and Equipment
TTAP
: Transfer of Technology for Agricultural Project
TV
: Television
UAECC
: Upazila Agricultural Extension Coordination Committee
UAO
: Upazila Agricultural Officer
UATCC
: Upazila Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee
UDC
: Union Digital Centre
UECC
: Upazila Extension Coordination Committee
UNDP
: United Nations Development Programme
UPW
: Upazila Planning Workshop
UTC
: Upazila Technical Committee (UATCC)
VAT
: Value-Added Tax
VBO
: Village Based Organisation
xxix

Agricultural Extension
Approach
Chapter

1.1 Introduction to Agricultural Extension Approach
Bangladesh has a very long history of agricultural activities. The Agriculture Department was
set up in the 1870s, during the British regime in the Bengal region and a number of agricultural
initiatives had since taken place in the eastern region of undivided Indian sub-continent. To
keep up with the changing nature of agriculture and farming, modern science and advanced
cultivation techniques have been used to transform the agriculture sector over time.
After the independence of Bangladesh in 1971, numerous transformations have taken place
in the agriculture sector by the visionary leadership of the father of the nation, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. He focused on infrastructural development and reformations in the
agricultural institutions to increase their efficiency and increased the number of services
surrounding agricultural extension, irrigation, agriculture inputs, etc. Subsequently, a new
approach to agriculture titled 'Training and Visit' (T&V) came into being.
In 1988, Axinn pointed out eight agricultural extension approaches, which have been
replicated by numerous organizations or institutions globally (Annex 1). The approaches are:
General or traditional agricultural extension approach
Produce-focused approach
Training and visit approach
Participatory agricultural extension approach
Project-based approach
Farm development approach
Extension-cost sharing approach
Educational institution-based approach.
To keep with the changing needs in agriculture, the Department of Agricultural Extension
adapted with the above mentioned eight recommendations of Axinn and formulated the
Revised Extension Approach (REA) in the 90s.
Agricultural Extension Approach

1.2 Revised Extension Approach
The Revised Extension Approach talks about punctuality, bottom-up approach, discipline,
training of field workers, linkage between farmer-extension-research, free flow of
information, partnership, working with farmer groups and scope of good communication with
farmers. This extension approach is based on farmer's, needs, on demands based on seasonal
and annual planning, and encompasses farmer groups of all tiers. A wellset monitoring and
evaluation mechanism is in place to ensure the accountability of the approach. Following the
adoption of the 'Revised Extension Approach', the Department of Agricultural Extension has
decided to materialize the 'New Agricultural Extension Policy 1996 (Annex 2) and its mission
of ensuring sustainable and profitable crop production.
Agricultural extension has become more modern and resourceful through the integration of
e-extension service in it. As a result, new vistas in the field of extension work have unfolded
with a promise of development in the field of agriculture.
The new Agricultural Extension Policy (1996) has been updated and the National Agricultural
Extension Policy 2016 has been drafted. The department has also updated its 'mission' and
made its 'vision' more reflective of the changing time.
The Department of Agricultural Extension will continue to achieve its mission and vision by
implementing the "Revised Extension Approaches" in the light of the "New Agricultural
Extension Policy 1996".
Vision of the Department of Agricultural Extension
Mission of the Department of Agricultural Extension
Agricultural Extension Approach
'Sustainable
and
profitable crop production'
'In order to ensure the growth of sustainable and profitable crop production,
optimise the knowledge and skills of farmers of all tiers through providing
skilled, effective, decentralised, localised, needs based and integrated
agricultural extension services.

Based on past experiences, it can be assumed that the agricultural extension will continue to
evolve. In fact, continuous improvement is an integral part of the revised extension approach.
The "Revised Extension Approaches" can ensure a very effective extension service. The
approach consists of five principles:
i.
Decentralization
ii.
Targeting
iii. Responsiveness to farmer's needs
iv. Use of a range of extension methods
vi. Working with farmer groups or organizations.
To meet the varying needs of different geographical regions, DAE has decentralised the
responsibilities for planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
extension programs at block, upazila, district and regional levels.
This system of decentralization helps to reach a quick decision, resolve challenges locally, plan
and implement need-based projects, ensure accountability, and deliver quality agricultural
equipment at the farmers' doorsteps, and has enabled skills at all levels of administration.
The following is a brief description of the Department of Agricultural Extension's decentralized
administrative levels.
Each Sub Assistant Agricultural Officer (SAAO) is responsible for the provision of day to day
extension services in the respective block. The SAAO is designated to ensure flow of technical
information and extend effective services around crop production. A brief on the block-based
extension work is given below:
i.
Identifying farmers' need of information and block-level plan around it
ii.
Assisting farmers to identify problems and possible solutions
iii. Supporting farmers, farmer groups or farmers' organizations for making microextension plan
iv. Extending support around farm management and improved cultivation-methods
v.
Monitoring of quality agro-equipment and ensuring their timely availability
vi. Completing official activities at block levels 'Agriculture Advice Centre' and collection
or dissemination of information
1.3 Policies Relating Revised Extension Approach
1.3.1 Decentralization
1.3.1.1 Block Level

v
Building coordination among Local Government and relevant GO/NGOs and
representing the Department
viii. Serving integrated extension service
ix. Strengthening farmer groups or organizations in the development of agriculture.
The Upazila level is fundamentally the tier where planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of extension work take place. The extension officials at this level are specially
entrusted with the supply of required resources as well as the skill development of the
extension workers.
A brief summary of decentralized extension work at Upazila levels is given below:
i.
Identifying farmers' need of information and plan around it
ii.
Identifying training needs of extension workers for their skill development
iii. Making developed agricultural extension plans
iv. Adopting field-specific special provisions
v.
Taking effective actions to improve extension services
vi. Solving technical problems of the block level
vii. Ensuring ready availability of agri-equipment for farmers
viii. Performing fertilizer or seed inspectors’ responsibilities and taking required legal
measures
ix. Conducting agriculture equipment monitoring and taking administrative actions
x.
Organizing the Upazila Technical Committee (UTC) meeting or planning workshops
xi. Linking Government, non-Government organizations with relevant entities
xii. Local coordination and required action around disaster management
xiii. Representing the Department in all Upazila level agricultural works.
The district level officials are designated to oversee extension work, decision making, solving
challenges and strengthening human resources in the district.
A brief summary of decentralized extension work at the district level is given below:
i.
Preparing a district extension plan.
ii.
1.3.1.2 Upazila Level
1.3.1.3 District Level
Agricultural Extension Approach

Overseeing or evaluating if the upazila level extension plan is technically sound and
also is based on identified information need of farmers
iii. Taking effective actions to speed up extension work
iv. Ensuring that all approved extension work is carried out successfully
v.
Representing the Department in all district level agricultural works
vi. Coordinating with all partners in ensuring participatory extension works
vii. Identifying challenges farmers face in block and upazila levels, and speeding up the
solution processes.
The regional office has complete authority on all agricultural extension work in the block,
upazila and district levels which have been awarded to the regional level office.
A brief summary of decentralized work at the regional level is as follows:
i.
Quality evaluation of the upazila and district level extension plans, its reviews,
necessary amendment and approval
ii.
Overseeing and adoption of successful implementation actions for all extension work
in the block, upazila and district levels
iii. Extending support to upazila and district level in the implementation of extension
strategies and agro-technologies
iv. Settling issues unresolved in the block, Upazila and district levels
v.
Technical inspection of the implemented extension work
vi. Representing and coordinating for the Department in all agricultural initiatives
taken by government and non-government organizations and other entities.
Field level DAE offices such as the Agriculture Training Institutes, Horticulture Centres,
Mushroom Development Centres, Plant Quarantine Centres have improved their quality of
service and decentralized their operations. Due to the improvement of service quality and
decentralization, DAE's field offices show increased ability, skilled and fast delivery of services.
All farmer's families are not in a class. To meet the varying needs of farmers of different kinds
of tiers, targeting should be thorough and should include all farmer groups of all tiers in the
agricultural extension work.
ii.
1.3.1.4 Regional Level
1.3.1.5 Decentralization and Development of Agriculture Training Institutes,
Horticulture Centre and Plant Quarantine Centers
1.3.2 Targeting

Department of Agricultural Extension has made it a mandate to provide extension services to
all categories of farmers. Therefore, needs and problems of different farmers have to be
identified and responsive services must be provided. The following list shows the categories
of farmers that need to be considered:
Woman farmers
ii.
Young people and future farmers
iii. Small and marginal farmers
iv. Large and medium category of farmers
v.
Members of landless families who have no farmland but a homestead, or take land of
other to cultivate
Department of Agricultural Extension follows the government approved classification of
farmers as per their farmland.
Classification of farmers' agricultural
Farmer households in category
household by operated area
(Per cent of Total)
Landless Households
(Operating below 0.02 hectares)
28.0
Marginal Farm Households
(Operating between 0.02 and 0.2 hectares)
40.2
Small Farm Households
(Operating between 0.2 and 1.0 hectares)
16.3
Medium Farm Households
(Operating between 1.0 and 3.0 hectares)
14.0
Large Farm Households
(Operating above 3.0 hectares)
1.5
Total
Source: BBS 2013
Table 1 shows that 85% of farm households in Bangladesh operate below one hectare of land.
This means that landless, marginal and small farmers are a major target group for DAE work.
Small and marginal farmers can be targeted by the approaches below:
i.
including specific programmes for small and marginal farmers in the upazila and
district extension work plans
ii.
including specific programs for women who head households and women of those
households in the upazila and district extension work plans
iii. ensuring that field workers engage with male and female farmers everyday
i.
Table 1: Classification of farmers based on size of land
Agricultural Extension Approach

selecting appropriate technologies for farmers
v
encouraging extension workers to work with all farmer groups
vi. considering farmer groups or organization's demand of the agriculture market
xii considering the farmers who are in attacked by natural disaster
viii. considering farmers' access to inputs and exposure to supply chain or value chain
ix. considering the needs of farmers who produce export goods.
One of the central roles of the "Revised Extension Work" is to meet the needs of farmers. To
ensure this, the first step of action is to conduct a Farmer Information Needs Assessment
(FINA). The steps to conduct FINA are listed below:
a.
SAAO's Diary: The SAAO’s diary is a tool to record details of their daily field work. It
contains details of problems faced by farmers and their changing needs. The diary
helps SAAO’s to build a report on farmers’ problems.
b.
Problem Census: It is a structured meeting with a group of farmers designed to ensure
full farmers’ participation in identifying their needs. It is a direct means of
documenting the problems farmers face individually or as a group.
c.
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA): It is a set of techniques designed to formally
ensure full participation of farmers in identifying their problems or needs for planning
appropriate responses. However, this step can sometimes be time consuming and
costly, and also require specialized skill on part of the extension worker.
d.
Consultation with other Organizations: Ascertaining farmers’ problems and needs is
also possible through exchange of opinions and discussions with agriculturalists at
block, union, upazila, district and regional level committees.
Following identification of the problems and ascertaining possible solutions, the next steps
include preparing a master list of farmers’ problems and then identifying priority issues,
followed by categorizing farmers’ problems into tiers.
The type of extension work and its objectives are considered in making a selection of the
extension approach. Department of Agricultural Extension encourages field workers to
employ diverse extension approaches, which are:
iv.
1.3.3 Responsiveness to Farmer's Needs
1.3.4 Using Extension Approaches

Mass media: such as television, radio, newspaper and other printed materials
ii.
Folk media: such as local popular song (like j
iii. Agriculture fairs: such as distribution of technological equipment, fruit fair, etc.
iv. Group extension events: such as field-days, group discussion and yard meetings, etc.
v.
Formal farmers’ training classes and farmers’ field schools
vi. Individual extension Services: such as demonstrations, interpersonal communication,
and farm visits
vii. ICT or e-extension work: such as mobile app, SMS, website, social media (e.g.,
Facebook, forming Facebook groups with farmers), etc.
The reasons for using a range of extension approaches are briefly examined below:
a.
Adoption Process: Different extension programs play different roles in the adoption
process. Different tools (leaflets, meetings, etc.) may be used to disseminate
knowledge to farmers on different topics.
b.
Cost-effectiveness: Extension activities can be carried out cost-effectively, for
example, by having a SAAO’s using an extension approach with a group of 10 farmers
rather than an individual farmer. This would reduce investment made by every farmer.
c.
Targeting: Different extension activities are appropriate for different types of farmers.
For example, motivational tours are often easier to arrange with a group of male
farmers, while courtyard meetings are often easily replicable for female farmers.
d.
Integrated Extension Activities: Extension activities can be mixed up to increase
effectiveness. For example, demonstrations can be coincided with field days,
disseminating printed materials during group discussion meetings.
e.
ICT or E-extension Services: Due to the advent of the digital age, and the utilization of
e-extension approach, quick dissemination of vital information has become very easy.
For example, mobile app, SMS, website, social media would assist dissemination of
information reaching farmers in remote locations.
The central idea in working with farmer groups or organizations is that it enables engaging
numerous farmers at the same time. Working with many farmers simultaneously opens up
diverse opportunities, such as:
i.
Linking up farmers in a single platform and giving access to extension services
ii.
Making all farmers aware of a problem an individual farmer is facing
i.
ārigān), street theatre etc.
1.3.5 Working with Farmer Groups or Organizations
Agricultural Extension Approach

Ensuring service to farmers who cannot access it individually
iv. Building liaison among farmer groups, increases cooperation and enables solving of
problems that would not have been addressed at the individual level
v.
Working with farmers in groups makes extension work cost-effective
vi. Improvement of the extension services and cooperation becomes possible
vii. Assessing farmers' needs and selecting the right service become easier
viii. It also fosters inter-personal communication among individual farmers.
The most significant elements of the "Revised Extension Approach" is the planning of extension
approaches. The first prerequisite of planning is to identify information-needs of farmers,
which needs to be carefully utilized in the planning phase. The next step is implementation of
the extension plan. Monitoring and evaluation are carried out to assess if the extension work is
carried out as per plan. Tracing an error at the early stages help extension approaches planning
better in future.
The extension planning cycle of the "Revised Extension Approach" is shown below:
There are five steps in the extension planning cycle.
a.
Identifying Needs: The first step in the planning cycle is identifying the problems
farmers face and deciding what information they need to address those problems.
iii.
1.4 Applying Revised Extension Approach to Extension Planning Cycle
Figure 1: Extension Planning Cycle
Identifying needs
Making plans
Implementation
Monitoring
Evaluation

Making Plans: Information accumulated is utilized to plan the relevant responses.
c.
Implementation: Extension work is carried out as per planned actions. However,
before implementation, a final check is carried out to find any discrepancy in the event
of which further review of the plan takes place.
d.
Monitoring: To assess if the implementation of extension work is going as per plan,
monitoring helps significantly. There are several ways to conduct monitoring, such as
supervising the program implementation in person, examining recorded data or
information, interviewing relevant people etc.
e.
Evaluation: Evaluation helps to find out if the objective of the whole implementation
work is achieved and thereby assesses the success of the project itself. If a gap is found,
a review of planning would be in order so that future project implementation becomes
better.
For extension approach to be effective, the conditions are as follows:
i.
Creation of an environment conducive to extension work
ii.
Safeguarding environment
iii. Weighing the usefulness of technologies
iv. Engaging women and securing their rights
v.
Extension service given irrespective of farmer category
vi. Extending services after assessing farmers' capacity
vii. Cost-effectiveness.
To strengthen the extension work, Department of Agricultural Extension takes up different
projects and activities. If extension work is carried out in several extension approaches, its
inconsistencies may create dissatisfaction among farmers. Moreover, farmers may grow
apprehensions regarding accessing need-based, effective and fruitful extension services.
Therefore, it is highly recommended that only the "Revised Extension Approaches" be
followed in planning and executing all projects and activities of extension work of the
Department of Agricultural Extension as following several approach is likely to hinder service
quality and effectiveness.
b.
1.5 Conditions of Effective and Fruitful Extension Approach
1.6 Following Revised Extension Approach Policies in all
Development Projects or Programmes of the Department of
Agricultural Extension
Agricultural Extension Approach

Management of
Agricultural Extension
Chapter

2.1 Extension as an Integrated Management
2.2 Reformed Organizational Structure of the Department of
Agricultural Extension
Production and productivity, agriculture market linage, commercial agriculture, protection of
environment, women's participation, value chain, supply chain etc. are major concerns for
agricultural extension. Participation and partnership among government, non-government,
autonomous and private organizations is how the extension work is being implemented.
Everyone relevant in it has made farmers the centre of interest, with agriculture and
development of the farmer as the main objective. It is expected that contributions,
cooperation and strong partnership among all the organizations related to agriculture will
help increase farmers' capacity, adding a new dimension to journey of present success in
agriculture.
Timely technological innovation and its application in agriculture, arduous inputs by farmers,
active participation from extension and research organizations under agricultural research
system lead to a greater change in production and productivity including increase in cropping
intensity. Resultantly, farmers' knowledge, skill and ability increase manifold.
Side by side, many adverse situations including increase in farm families and the impacts of
climate change renders the workforce in extension work inadequate and inefficient. To
address these challenges, the Department of Agricultural Extension was reformed in 2014
with 26,042 extension worker positions created from block to national levels.
The Director General of DAE is leading this gigantic human resource. Following a thorough
analyses and considering the types and nature of overall activities, the Department has been
organised into 8 wings. This reformed infrastructure of the Department of Agriculture is
shown overleaf.
Management of Agricultural Extension

Figure 2: Organogram of Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE)
Management of Agricultural Extension
Director
Administration and
Finance Wings (220)
Additional Director
Administration, Finance
and Support Services
Deputy Director
Administration
Deputy Director
Personnel
Additional
Deputy Director
Additional
Deputy Director
Additional
Deputy Director
Additional
Deputy Director
Deputy Director
Legal and Support Services
Additional
Deputy Director
Assistant Director
Finance, Accounts & Audit
Director
Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT
Wing (114)
Additional Director
Project Planning
Deputy Chief
Policy Planning
Deputy Director
Production
Economist
Agricultural
Economist
Assistant Chief
Statistical Officer
Junior Research
Officer
Deputy Chief
Project Preparation
Production
Economist
Agricultural
Economist
Statistical Officer
Junior Research
Officer
Additional Director
Project Implementation
and Evaluation
Deputy Director
Deputy Director
Project Implementation
Statistical Officer
Deputy Director
Project evaluation and
monitoring
Statistical Officer
Director General
(Grand Total: 26035 +7 =26042)
Director
Plant Protection Wing (71)
Additional Director
Pesticide Administration
and Quality Control
Deputy Director
Pesticide Administration
Additional
Deputy Director
Deputy Director
Pesticide Quality Control
Additional
Deputy Director
Additional Director
Pest Management,
Surveillance and
Forecasting
Deputy Director
Integrated Pest
Management
Additional
Deputy Director
Deputy
Surveillance and
Forecasting
Director
Additional
Deputy Director
Deputy Director (12)
Quarantine Centre
Category 1
Quarantine
Pathologist (12)
Field Assistant (12)
Sub-Assistant
Quarantine Officer (12)
Director
Horticulture Wing
Additional Director
Horticultural Crops
Deputy Director
Fruits & Flowers
Deputy Director
Tuber, Vegetables &
Spices Crops
Horticulturist (28)
Deputy Director
Horticulture Centre
Category- 1
Sub-Assistant
Horticulture Officer (112)
Horticulturist
Category- 2
Horticulture Centre
Sub-Assistant
Horticulture Officer (75)
Nursery
Superintendent (20)
Horticulture Centre
Category-3
Sub-Assistant
Horticulture Officer (40)
Deputy Director
Mushroom
Development Institute
Mushroom Development
Officer (4)
Assistant Mushroom
Development Officer (4)
Directors
Crops Wing (52)
Additional Director
Cereal & Oil Crops
Deputy Director
Cereal Crops
Deputy Director
Pulses, Oil and
other Crops
Additional Director
Cash Crops
Deputy Director
Jute Production
and Marketing
Deputy Director
Sugarcane and
other Cash crops
Additional Director (14)
Regional Office
Deputy Director (14)
Establishment and
Development
Senior Agricultural
Engineer (14)
Deputy Director (64)
District Office
District Training
Officer (64)
Additional Deputy Director
(Crop) (64)
Additional Deputy Director
(PP) (64)
Additional Deputy Director
( Horticulture) (64)
Agricultural Engineer (64)
Director
Plant Quarantine Wing (309)
Additional Director
Import, Export
and Laboratory
Deputy Director
Import
Additional
Deputy Director
Quarantine
Entomologist
Quarantine Pathologist
Quarantine
Inspector
Deputy Director
Export
Additional
Deputy Director
Quarantine Entomologist
Quarantine Pathologist
Quarantine
Inspector
Additional
Deputy Director
Quarantine Rules,
Policy and Laboratory
Quarantine Entomologist
Quarantine Pathologist
Additional
Deputy Director (8)
Category 2
Quarantine Entomologist (8)
Quarantine Inspector (8)
Quarantine Pathologist (10)
Category-3
Quarantine Inspector (10)
Programmer
Sub-Assistant
Engineer
Additional Director
Physical Infrastructure
Development and ICT
Management
Deputy Director
ICT Management
Assistant
Programmer
Assistance
Maintenance
Engineer
Executive Engineer
Physical
Infrastructure
Mechanical
Engineer
Assistant
Engineer
Director
Field Services
Wing (22716)
Additional Director
Monitoring and
Implementation
Control Room
Agricultural
Extension Officer (2)
Deputy Director
Monitoring
Deputy Director
Implementation
Additional Director
Extension and Coordination
Deputy Director
Coordination
Additional Director
Inputs
Deputy Director
Fertilizer Management
Deputy Director
Seed and Other Inputs
Upazila Agricultural
Officer (487)
Upazila Office
Additional Agricultural
Officer (487)
Agricultural Extension
Officer (974)
Assistant Agricultural
Extension Officer (487)
Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officer (14032)
Block Level
Sub-Assistant Plant
Protection Officer (487)
Deputy Director
Extension
Director
Training Wing (805)
Additional Director
Training
Additional Director
Diploma Education
and Co-ordination
Deputy Director
Higher Education and
Foreign Training
Deputy Director
Farmer Training
Deputy Director
Diploma Education
Deputy Director
Curriculum Development
and Education
Principal
Agricultural Training
Institute
Vice Principal (16)
Sub-Assistant Agricultural
Officer (60)
Block Level
Sub-Assistant Plant Protection
Officer (15)
Metropolitan Agricultural
Officer (15)
Metropolitan Thana
Chief Instructor (80)
Senior Instructor (16)
Instructor (28)
Sub- Assistant
Instructor (48)
Agricultural Extension
Officer (15)
Additional
Deputy Director

2.3 Responsibilities of the Wings of the Department of
Agricultural Extension
For the efficient and successful management of the Department of Agricultural Extension, the
Director General plays the lead coordination role for all its wings. For overall extension
activities like the extension of technology, the increase of production and productivity, the
production of standard agricultural products that are safe for public health, management of
agricultural inputs, tackling natural disasters, services around e-extension, value chain
creation and development of the export sector, adaptation of technology with the changing
climate, safeguard of agricultural environment, increasing capacity of people responsible for
the services around extension, overall socio-economic development of farmers – every wing
of the Department has assigned roles to play. However, Field services wing is mainly
responsible to ensure that farmers get the extension services. This section lists a brief
description of the responsibilities of the Departmental wings.
The main responsibilities of the administration and finance wing are:
i.
Coordination for the development of annual budget of all the wings of the Department
ii.
Maintenance of all types of revenue budget and accounts of the Department
iii. Carrying out administrative duties around recruitment, transfer and management of staff
iv. Safeguarding the updated list of all assets of the Department and settling disputes
v.
Taking vehicles from many sources into Department carpool, allocation and maintenance
vi. Ensuring working environment of the Department, infrastructure management and
safety
vii. Operation of all administrative activities of the Department and their management etc.
The main responsibilities of the horticulture wing are:
i.
Finding the intricacy behind food crop and ensuring extension of new technologies
ii.
Collection and assessment of native and foreign food crop's germplasm, their
extension planning and execution
iii. Supervise the production of improved and quality seeds and saplings in horticulture
centres
iv. Annual production planning and implementation of the horticulture or mushroom
centres, administrative approval of financing and monitoring of ongoing projects
v.
Overseeing fund release, taking steps to raise revenues and checking all incomeexpenditure transactions of the centers
vi. Development planning for the horticulture centres' human resources, infrastructure
and technological aspects and its implementation
vii. Planning, implementation and monitoring of the wing activities
2.3.1 Administration and Finance Wing
2.3.2 Horticulture Wing

viii. Coordination with relevant research and other institutions
ix. Identifying challenges of food crop production and liaising with research institutes and
universities for a research-based solution
x.
Initiating human resource capacity building steps at head office and the centres
xi. Coordination with private nursery or mushroom production institutions for extending
support etc.
The main responsibilities of the training wing are listed below:
i.
Assessing the training needs of all levels of the Department of Agricultural Extension,
planning the training schedule and its implementation
ii.
Initiating training for farmers and thus enhance their capacity, and coordinating and
collecting information regarding the upazila or district-level farmer trainings
iii. Developing training guidelines for the department and updating it as required
iv. Developing a master plan regarding internal and international trainings
v.
Drafting and improving training curriculum of all the trainings
vi. Overseeing and monitoring of the administrative, academic and development
activities of the Agricultural Extension Institutes.
vii. Liaising with 'Bangladesh Technical Education Board' on Diploma in Agriculture
viii. Taking initiative to develop and implement the semester plan for the Diploma in
Agriculture curriculum.
ix. Preparing and reviewing the text books of the Agriculture Training Institute
x.
Coordination among Bangladesh Technical Education Board and similar entities
xi. Developing farmer training modules that are need-based and timely
xii. Collection, dissemination and publication of ICT and internet information related to
agriculture
xiii. Creating a database of people who were trained locally and internationally.
The major roles of the crops wing are listed below:
i.
Planning of cultivation and production of all field crops and overseeing and monitoring
its implementation.
ii.
Playing a role in the spreading of crop production technologies
iii. Assessing farmers' acceptance or adoption rate and usage of the crop production
technologies
iv. Contributing to the development of proposal leading to national policy formulation
v.
Taking special action for the increased modern cultivation technology of cash crops
and non-cereal crops such as pulses, oil etc.
2.3.3 Training Wing
2.3.4 Crops Wing
Management of Agricultural Extension

vi. Finding about field-level problems in commercial crops production, consulting
research institutions for probable solution and sending it to the field level
vii. Drafting extension message focusing the adoption of the latest crop production
technology and taking initiative to ensure that extension workers are duly trained on it etc.
The main roles of the field services wing are as follows:
i.
Finalisation of seasonal and annual programme plans responsive to agricultural
contexts and regions and farmers' needs, then extending assistance for their
successful implementation, and conducting monitoring and evaluation
ii.
Contributing in selecting the targeted crop cultivation and production and taking
necessary actions to achieve those targets
iii. Dissemination of information and technology received from research institutions and
other organisations
iv. Ensuring that farmers have ready access to quality crop seed and fertiliser as per
assessment of farmers’ needs
v.
Calculating crop production cost based on information received from field level
vi. Taking timely and effective actions to promote agricultural mechanization
vii. Implementing effective strategy in tackling the effects of climate change on
agriculture
viii. Taking appropriate actions for early warning in the onset of disaster and for
rehabilitation activities in the post-disaster time
ix. Collecting information from diverse sources regularly, assessing the overall progress of
extension work and conducting, monitoring and evaluation
x.
Extending instant solution to problems identified on a daily basis
xi. Building coordination among all government and non-government organizations
related to agricultural extension work
xii. Taking steps so that the extension workers and farmers can easily access e-extension
work
xiii. Stressing on crop production as per crop-zones to protect the environment
xiv. Taking measures in selecting suitable technology, ensuring overall management and
collecting feedback in the backward, disaster-prone and adverse condition (for example,
the southern region, draught-affected barind areas, char lands and hilly areas)
xv. Building a linkage among the farmers, extension work, research, education and the
market, and establishing a supportive environment
xvi. Playing a role in drafting revenue and development budgets, and in releasing funds.
2.3.5 Field Services Wing

2.3.6 Plant Protection Wing
2.3.7 Plant Quarantine Wing
The main responsibilities of the plant protection wing are:
Pesticide Ordinance 1971 (amendment of 2009), The Pesticide Rules 1985
(Amendment of 2010) and other regulations.
ii.
Quality control of pesticides together with region, district, upazila and metropolitan
level officials
iii. Implementation of vigilant surveys (surveillance) and Early Warning Programmes
iv. Monitoring of environmental friendly and quality standard pesticide production and
marketing system
v.
Steps to save crops by enhancing administration and quality control activities of pesticide
vi. Monitoring of pesticides factories and production methods
vii. Organize training, seminars and workshops to increase the awareness of the people on
the use of safe pesticides
viii. Coordination with research institutes and the collection and extension of crop
protection technologies
ix. Sample analysis for the accuracy of pesticide quality or application doses
x.
Examine the residual levels of pesticides and take action accordingly
xi. Management of pesticide laboratory established in the wing
xii. Monitoring the presence of pest regularly at the field level and reduce the loss of crop
loss by management.
The main responsibilities of the plant quarantine wing are:
i.
Play a role in controlling plant health by following international regulations in
exporting and importing the plant and plant product
ii.
Encourage and implement of Good Agricultural Practice (GAP)
iii. Play a role in International Plant Protection Organization (NPPO) according to
International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)
iv. Implementation of plant quarantine law
v.
Following and implementing international agreements, protocols, conventions, etc.
on conserving plant health supported and following, implementing and coordinating
plant biodiversity conservation activities
vi. Coordination with the quarantine center and all related agencies for importing plants
and plant products fairly
vii. Manage plant quarantine programme for keeping export activities strong
i.
Performing duties of pesticide registration and licensing activities in the light of The
Management of Agricultural Extension

viii. Performing phytosanitary inspection and issuing phytosanitary certificate for exportable
products before export
ix. Examining papers of exportable flora and vegetable products and check if they comply
with the imported country's demand
x.
Conduct field test or inspection activities before exporting plant and vegetable
products.
The main responsibilities of the planning, implementation and ICT wing:
i.
Inform Bangladesh High Commissioners or Ambassadors deployed abroad about
potential crops and exchange information related to agricultural interest for the sake of
the overall development of Bangladesh
ii.
Duties of providing agriculture related information and opinion according to the global
needs
iii. Assessing the wing's demand-based training plan and taking all necessary actions to
improve the skills of all the employees working in it.
iv. Collection of updated information about crops along with various activities of DAE and
create databases
v.
Preparation of data, analyses and collection of information related to crop and
implementation of specific strategies to accelerate crop production
vi. Preparation, implementation, monitoring and supervision of plans of all the physical
works of the Department
vii. Contact with different donor agencies for receiving project assistance
viii. Taking initiative and monitoring to formulate, approval and implement various
schemes or programmes related to the department demand
ix. Evaluate the feasibility of the project; take the necessary steps like receiving
Environmental Impact Assessment certificates and other necessary initiative.
x.
Editing and preparing report on base line surveys of the accepted project, mid-term
evaluation, impact assessment and make future plan based on the data received
xi. Prepare DAE's short-term, mid-term and long-term project concept papers and
outline timely
xii. Take action to prepare, implement and expand the necessary plans for e-agriculture
activities
xiii. Taking effective measures for setting up and commissioning e-extension service
centers at headquarters and field levels
xiv. DAE website management, data addition and updating
xv. Create database with all information related to the Department of Agricultural
Extension, overall activities and detailed information of the farmer
xvi. Maintenance and development of the department’s physical infrastructure
xvii.Collect information, maintain and respire ICT equipment at headquarters and field offices.
2.3.8 Planning, Project Implementation and ICT wing

2.4 Monitoring and Supervision of Field-Level Extension Work by
all Heads of Wings
2.5 Activities Management Committee of DAE
DAE's wings are assigned with special assignments for maintaining transparency and
wellbeing in field extension activities. Wings have to carry out these responsibilities seriously,
such as plant protection wing is responsible for controlling pest attack on crop and pest
surveillance, Plant quarantine wing is responsible for producing exportable crop and
implementing GAP, Crops wing is responsible for extension of technology in the fields
especially in the promotion of new inventive technologies, utilization of region and farmer
need-based technologies and formulate production plan, Horticulture wing is responsible for
high value crop cultivation and extension of technology and Training wing is responsible for
developing capacity for all the extension workers including farmers and SAAO.
The Directors of respective DAE wings will play a role in supervision and monitoring of all
extension activities (and inter-wing activities) along with wing related activities using their
own and field expertise which will have an impact on the production and productivity of crops.
The wings of the department are inter-related to planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural extension programs. Besides, it is particularly important to have
coordination between the wings for determining well planned work-process and decision
making in the review of progress of different activities, successful execution of plans, taking
appropriate actions under changed circumstances and natural disasters etc. Therefore, a
committee headed by the Director General will be active to coordinate the overall activities of
the Department named by the Agricultural Extension Management Committee. Heads of
each wing will play an active role in discussing, reviewing and taking development decisions
about the situation in the field of their jurisdiction in the meeting.
Committee members will meet at least once a month and review the decisions taken in the
previous meeting and decide the future plan analysing the current situation. The decisions taken
in the meeting will be implemented through increasing coordination within the DAE wings.
Committee may coopt the other related agencies or organizations in the committee it they
think it is necessary or invite them to attend the meeting if necessary.
Director of Planning, Project implementation and ICT Wing will act as Member-Secretary of
the committee.
2.5.1 Agricultural Extension Management Committee
Management of Agricultural Extension

2.5.2 Review Committee of DAE Annual Development Programme
2.7.1 District Level Departmental Monthly Meeting
Various projects of the Department have been playing an important role in the extension
activities. The meeting on annual development programme will be held at least once per
month to take immediate action for reviewing monitoring and overcoming challenges related
to project activities and to implement the project's activities efficiently. The Director General
of the Department will call this meeting exclusively and coordinate the overall affairs of the
project. All wing Directors will be present in the meeting.
Director of Planning, Project implementation and ICT Wing will perform all the duties related
to this meeting.
There is a co-ordination committee of the DAE with the regional head and ATI heads to review
the progress of the field level activities, bring speed or dynamism & coordination in work and
to improve the effectiveness of the extension activities. The head of the committee is DAE
Director General and Member-Secretary Deputy Director (Administration, Administration
and Finance Wing). Every year meeting will be held three times in season-wise schedule,
every meeting will be held before the crop season- 1st meeting: Kharif I season- in January,
2nd meeting: Kharif II season in May and 3rd meeting: In the Rabi season in September. The
committee will call for interim meeting considering the need.
The Deputy Director of the district will call monthly meetings with the Upazila Agricultural
Officers in the first week of every month or at a convenient time. The officials of the institutes
of the district under national agricultural research system, Bangladesh Agricultural
Development Corporation and other agriculture related government and non-government
organizations will be invited to attend the meeting.
The meeting will be discussed in detail about the activities of technology application, quality
of extension services, condition of crop field, progress of implementation of development
work, farmers’ problems and solution in the field and decision will be taken.
All the participants will be assured in the decision-making process as they present in the meeting
of the Inter-departmental delegation, supportive environment for integrated extension work
will be created, positive relationship and linkage between the DAE and relevant organization will
be established, and partnership will increase. Moreover, all the district and upazila level officials
2. 6 Co-ordination Committee of DAE
2.7 Finding Ways for Strengthening Extension Works in
Departmental Meetings at the District or Regional Level

can be informed about the latest agricultural technology, inputs receipt or supply situation etc.
Inter-departmental interaction in the meeting will create opportunities for determining the
process of consolidation of extension programmes in the district.
Similar to the district, monthly meetings will be held in regional level with the participation of
Deputy Directors of the districts. Additional Director of the region will organize this meeting.
The designated officers from the Regional Centres of Research Institutes, Bangladesh
Agricultural Development Corporation and other non-government organizations related to
agriculture will be invited to be present in the meeting.
The meeting will be discussed in detail about the activity of technology application, quality of
extension services, condition of crop field, progress of implementation of development work,
farmer’s problems and solution in the field and decision will be taken.
Inter-departmental discussion and review will help in strengthening extension programs. The
regular presence of inter-departmental delegates will strengthen mutual cooperation and
linkage in the agricultural development work.
A fair plan plays an important role in ensuring accountability and compulsive work. DAE
completes the preparation of annual plan in advance in order to implement crop production
and need based extension programmes. Day-long planning workshop will be organized at
national level for the purpose of revising, correcting, timely and perfect planning based on
time change and demand before the start of three seasons (Kharif-I, Kharif-II and Robi). The
workshop will have two phases, 1st phase- Review and finalization of the seasonal crop
production plan and the second phase- Review and finalization of the plans for seasonal
extension programmes based on farmers’ needs.
The workshop will be organized before the start of the season so that the advance and total
preparation of all the activities can be taken. Approved various seasonal activities of different
projects of DAE will also be presented in the workshop.
The participants of the workshop will be the officials from the headquarters of the Department
of Agricultural Extension, Regional and District level officials, representatives of the
organizations under National Agricultural Research Systems, representatives of the seed
certification agency, representatives of Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation and
representatives of agricultural and other related public and non-government organisations.
Director, Field Services Wing or Crops Wing will play a role in organising and managing the
workshop.
2.7.2 Departmental Monthly Meeting of the Region
2.8 Seasonal Workshop on Crop Production and Extension Planning
at National Levels
Management of Agricultural Extension

2.9 Project Preparation and Mainstreaming
of
Project Activities in DAE
and Follow-Up
2.9.1 Preparation of the Project Plan
2.9.2 Mainstreaming DAE Project Activities and Follow-Up
Planning, Project Implementation and ICT wing will formulate project plan to enhance
extension activities by verifying the feasibility of suitable and sustainable agricultural
technologies. Special attention will be given on the following topics in planning the project:
i.
The fundamental basis for formulating the project plan is based on demand, which will
indicate "Bottom-up" activities
ii.
Char area, southern, hill tracks, haor areas, barind tracks and agricultural backward
areas will be given priority for project preparation
iii. Emphasize in planning project on the extension of newly developed technologies and
introduction of such productive cropping pattern that can increase cropping intensity.
iv. Adaptation to climate change, export trade, high value crop production, flower
farming, supply chain or value chain etc. will be considered
v.
"Revised Extension Approach" will be applicable for all the projects
vi. The maximum use of local resources will be ensured
vii. Female and educated youth's participation in agriculture will increase
viii. Mechanization in agriculture will be expanded
ix. Projected activities won’t have any adverse impact on the environment
x.
Maximum use of available resources will be ensured
xi. It will be helpful for poverty reduction and employment generation
xii. Extension activities under the project will be sustainable even after the expiration of
the project
Xiii. Emphasis will be given on such extension activities in the project so that the crop
production and productivity will be increased as well as can be supportive for
development of capabilities of farmers and extension workers.
It is noteworthy that this project activities or applications do not sustain after the expiration of
the project even though the implemented extension activities are productive. Therefore,
there will be a no-cost or low-cost follow up system at the end of the project for assimilation of
the productive extension activities with main stream.

2.10 Annual Performance Agreement
2.11 Extension Services Responsive to Crop Zoning or Environment
The government has adopted the strategy of implementing the 'Annual Performance
Agreement' (APA) on the basis of administration level in order to increase institutional
efficiency, strengthen transparency and accountability, good governance and consolidation of
resources. The Department of Agricultural Extension will determine the target of annual
activities at the national, zonal, district, upazila and block levels. The designated officers of
every level of the department will complete the work assigned to them on the basis of the
signed 'Annual Performance Agreement'.
Additional Director of the region and the Deputy Director of the district will be responsible for
taking appropriate strategy for providing crop zoning-based or environment friendly
extension services.
All crops are not equally suitable for all regions due to geological and natural environmental
factors. The Department of Extension will identify areas and local environment friendly crops
(crop zoning) and the extension plan will be made and the extension services will be ensured.
Of southern char area, hill tracks, barind tracks, haor region etc are known as backward area in
crop production due to their natural disadvantages. The Department of Agricultural Extension
will prepare an environment friendly extension plan for the development of these backward
areas and play an effective role in providing specialised extension services so that the
development of the socio-economic conditions of the farmers accelerates.
The Department will not take any extension activities which is a threat to environment. They
will ensure the proper use of the resources and will continue the extension activities by
ensuring the balance of nature.
For example, the Department will give priority on selecting crops that have less pressure on
the underground irrigation source and give importance to efficient irrigation management in
order to prevent under-ground water level degradation or to maintain water level. It will
2.11.1 Region-based Extension Services
2.11.2 Specialised Extension Services in Backward Agricultural Areas
2.11.3 Environmental Conservation Activities
Management of Agricultural Extension

provide emphasis on surface water sources and rain water harvest to preserve underground
water. Recently, the Ministry of Agriculture and DAE has imposed special importance on the
implementation of aus rice based cropping pattern technology dependent on rain water due
to overall economic and technical reason including environmental conservation.
The productivity of the agriculture sector is facing a negative impact due to climate change,
increase in salinity and uptake of salinity, gradual lowering of ground water level, reduction in
fertility of agricultural land due to lack of supply of organic matter and micronutrients. There
have to be greater efforts in planning and implementing extension plans including the
environment-friendly technologies and strategies in order to maintain productivity in the
changed environment.
There is natural disaster in every year in Bangladesh and this disaster can be seen as a reason
for severe hindrance in agriculture. The Department of Extension will be very careful about
dealing with the disaster and will work to determine the appropriate action plan.
Two types of action will be taken against the disaster in agriculture, namely–
i.
Preparedness of the disaster: Using disaster-tolerant technology and identifying
disaster prone areas
ii.
Post-disaster management: Agricultural rehabilitation or agricultural incentive
programmes after the disaster
Regardless of the practices, it will be applied in a very highly productive extension programme
in both cases.
The DAE will observe 'Agricultural Extension Week' at any week of the first fourteen days of
December every year in order to make the extension program strong and dynamic and will
include the following activities:
i.
Unique theme will be selected for each year
ii.
Week will be celebrated at national, district and upazila levels
iii. Farmers, all government, semi-government, non-government autonomous, private
organizations including people from all walks of society will be invited to celebrate
the week
iv.
A rally will be organised on the 1st day of the week in national, district and upazila level
to initiate the extension week celebrations
2.11.4 Extension Activities in the Imbalanced and Decaying Natural Environment
2.12 Extension Management in the Event of Natural Disaster
2.13 Observing 'Agricultural Extension Week'

v.
There will be strong promotion through print, electronic media, posters, banners,
microphone etc. and memorandum will be published
vi. There will be arrangements for meetings or seminars or workshops everyday and
discussion on DAE's achievements, future action plans, increase in agricultural
production and productivity, development of agro-technology extension and
extension programs, development of the socio-economic condition of the farmers etc.
will be given importance on these programs.
vii. Selected best farmers will be rewarded at the upazilas, districts and national levels, but
a farmer will be rewarded from any one place, upazila, district or national.
viii. On the occasion of celebrating the week, 'Agriculture Technology Fair' will be
organised in the national, district and upazila level.
Monitoring and distribution of various agricultural inputs at the doorstep of the farmer is an
important responsibility of the Department of Extension. The necessity of fertilizers, seeds,
insecticides, agricultural machinery, etc. for the production of crops is essential. The
Department of Extension is constantly working to provide quality agricultural inputs and
guaranteed availability to the farmers in their doorsteps. All the officials of the Department of
Extension have to take more vigilance measures for continuous efforts so that this effort
doesn’t decrease rather increasing the speed of the development and continue this effort.
It is to be noted that upazila level officials are designated as fertilizer and seed inspectors. The
designated officers of the upazila should ensure the monitoring and supervision system to be
continuous and effective.
There are District or Upazila Fertilizer and Seed Monitoring Committee and District or Upazila
Agriculture Rehabilitation Implementation Committee for the distribution and management
of fertilizers, seeds, agricultural machinery and other agricultural inputs. The officials of the
district or upazila level offices of the extension department have been working as the
member-secretary of these committees. The officials of the Department will be very diligent
in fulfilling their responsibilities in these committees.
Agricultural input assistance cards jointly signed by SAAO, UP or Municipality Chairman or
Mayor, Upazila Agriculture Officer and Upazila Nirbahi Officer was introduced the by the
Ministry of Agriculture in the year 2009-10 to maintain transparency in the activities regarding
agricultural input distribution, subsidy, agricultural credit, agricultural rehabilitation,
agricultural incentives etc. This card is also recognised as the identity card of the farmer, this
2.14 Role of Extension Work in the Management of Agricultural Inputs
2.15 Agricultural Input Assistance Card
Management of Agricultural Extension

card is especially helpful for opening the bank account in exchange for only 10 taka. Another
feature of the card is that the cardholder farmer feels his dignity and introduces himself
proudly.
The card has various information including their own photograph which helps them to
become aware of the actual identity and description. Department of Agricultural Extension
plays a role in distribution, use and management to the farmers. Currently, 20.8 million 14
thousand families which is 99% of 21 million 26 thousand farm families are benefited from
agricultural input assistance cards.
The Ministry of Agriculture introduced farmer's bank account in exchange for only 10 taka per
annum in the year 2009-10 to the farmers in order to bring transparency in the field of
agriculture loan, agricultural rehabilitation, agricultural incentives, subsidy etc. This is very
popular among farmers and has encouraged the attitude of saving money among farmers. So
far, the number of opening of the farmer's account is 11.2 million, i.e. about 50% of the total
farming households. The government's financial assistance to the farmers is directly delivered
to the farmers' bank account. Later, the farmers withdraw money from the bank account
whenever they need. The Department of Food has taken measures so that the farmers can
directly pay through their bank account during the purchase of rice, thereby increasing the
importance of the farmer bank account. Department of Agricultural Extension provides full
support to the farmers for opening and managing the bank account.
Farmers and different groups of people go to the Agriculture Office directly to get fast solution
to their problems and lack-complaint or use the information and communication technology
to inform their problems. 'Complaints Centre' will be opened in every Block (Agriculture
Advisory Centre), Upazila, District, Regional and National level offices in order to handle
problems and complaints. Immediate solution will be taken and recorded in the reserved
register with due consideration of the problems and complaints submitted in the complaint
centre. Senior officers will monitor the register during the office inspection and record his
comments.
2.16 Farmer's Bank Account
2.17 Complaint Centres for Addressing Problems and Complaints
and Flow of Information
2.17.1 Complaint Centre

These issues and problems will be taken into account during the process of formulating a
development plan and decision-making. It is possible to know about the situation in the field
and the condition of the extension programme by observing recorded problems and
deficiency-complaints. The complaints centre will be open every day during office hours.
Field level problems can be considered in two ways:
a.
Problems that need to be solved urgently or take precautions, such as attack of brown
grasshoppers.
b
Technical problems when emergency solutions are not possible and require time for
monitoring and research, such as, less production even after good nursing.
Immediate solutions should be given to emergency problems and inform higher officials
understanding the importance of the problem. Draw attention step by step to bring the
attention of higher authorities or competent organizations in order to get satisfactory
solutions in the case of other technical issues.
Note that any specific problem solved or pending should be immediately notified to the
Director General and the Director, Field Services Wing.
The Department of Agricultural Extension has a continuous flow of information to solve any
problem of the farmer (Figure 3), the details of the flow of information from the Department
of Agricultural Extension are:
2.17.2 Information Flow of the Extension Department
Management of Agricultural Extension

2.17.2.1 From the Farmers to Sub-assistant Agriculture Officer
2.17.2.2. From Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officer to Upazila
The arrangement for recording problems and solutions of farmers is contained in the specific
part of the diary of Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officers. The Sub- Assistant Agriculture Officer
will write the problems received from the farmers and the solution given to the problem in the
diary. If any problems remain unresolved, keep it also in diary. All these written problems will
be helpful in formulating the agriculture-extension plans.
Sub- Assistant Agriculture Officer will present in the next weekly meeting or training to be held
in the upazila to solve the unresolved problems recorded in the diary and the solution will be
informed to the concerned farmers as soon as possible. The Agricultural Extension Officer will
National Research
Institute/SRDI/
BADC/BCIC/Input
Suppliers and
Other Related Organization
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION
Director General, DAE
DAE Management Committee
Problem Solution
Field Services Wing
Crops Wing
Planning Wing
Plant Protection Wing
Plant Protection Wing
Horticulture Wing
Training Wing
Plant Quarantine Wing
Regional Office
Regional Research Station
District Office
Research Sub-Centre/BADC/SRDI/Input
Supply Organization
Upazila Office
Related Offices at
Upazila Level
Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officer
SAAO Diary
FINA
Farmers and Farmers Group
Figure 3. Flow of Information in the Department of Agricultural Extension
Problem Solution
Problem Solution
Problem Solution

be responsible for this and take help from Additional Agriculture Officers or Upazila Agriculture
Officers or any experienced person to solve the problem if needed. Issues related to any other
department (e.g. fisheries, livestock etc.) have to transfer to Upazila Agriculture officers.
Upazila Agriculture Officers will present the unresolved issues at the district level monthly
meeting and the received solution will be made available to the concerned farmers through
the Deputy Agriculture Officer. The Deputy Director can take assistance with experienced
person or organization of the district to solve the problem.
The Deputy Directors will present the unresolved issues at the district level in the monthly
meeting held in the region and will take the arrangement to reach the given solution to the
concerned farmers regularly. The Additional Director of Region will present unresolved
pending problem in the monthly meeting in the Regional Agricultural Technical Coordination
Committee (RTC) and will take measures to reach the concerned solution to the farmers.
The Additional Director will send the pending unresolved problems to the Director, Field
Services Wing, who will be assisted by the DAE Management Committee or the national level
related research institute or any related organisation.
Development of linkage among Extension-Research-Farmer is undeniable in extension work.
Special emphasis has been laid on this linkage in the new agricultural extension policy and the
revised extension approach. Extension-Research is working with mutual collaboration and
linkage. Connecting the farmer with the extension-research will strengthen the foundation of
interconnected bridges.
The areas of Extension-Research-Farmer linkage are mentioned below:
i.
There are various committees such as EPICC, NATCC, ATC, DEPC, UAECC as part of the
implementation strategy of the new Agricultural Extension Policy, which are currently
2.17.2.3. From the Upazila to District
2.17.2.4. From District to the Regional Level
2.17.2.5 From Regional to the Headquarter
2.18.1 Extension-Research-Farmer Linkage
2.18 Linkage Between Extension and Other Institutions
Management of Agricultural Extension

reorganised as NTC, RTC, DTC, UTC are in the national, regional, district and upazila
levels. Extension, research and farmers will play an active role in these committees
ii.
Extension, research and farmer will be active participants in the Research Institute
Coordination Committee (RICC), Research Institute Planning Meeting, ExtensionResearch Workshop, Extension Planning Workshop etc.
iii. Extension, research and farmers will implement on-farm research and multi-location
testing with the cooperation of each other
iv.
Extension and farmers will be included in the training or workshop on "inventive
technology reporting" organized by research institutions.
v.
There will be spontaneous participation of research institutions and farmers in any
meeting or workshop or agricultural fair or field day etc. organized by the Department
of Agricultural Extension, similarly there will be extension and farmer’s participation in
the programmes organised by the research institutes
vi. The department of extension will implement the motivational tourism programme for
farmers' motivation in the research centres
vii. Department of Agricultural Extension and Research will work jointly to resolve field
level issues
viii. Research-extension-farmers will jointly visit the disease prone areas or hotspots of
disease and take necessary action.
ix. Extension and research will encourage farmers in innovative work.
Besides, new areas of extension-research-farmer links need to be identified.
The Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) is committed to respond to all the needs of the
farmers. The Department of Extension has to take up the responsibility of ensuring the
availability of various agricultural inputs, agricultural machinery, agricultural credit etc. in
addition to the activities of extension of technology to the doorstep of farmers. Due to this, the
Department of Extension will maintain connectivity and coordination with Agricultural
Information Service (AIS), BADC, BCIC, Bank and other all the public or private or semiautonomous or autonomous private organizations. This will increase mutual partnership.
DAE and AIS have been working in mutual cooperation and strong bonding to promote
agriculture. 'Krishi Kotha’ published by AIS is a highly established magazine for promoting
timely agricultural messages for farmers. DAE places great effort on this magazine to
disseminate relevant agricultural information. Community Radio FM 98.8 is broadcasting under
the management of AIS in Amtali of Barguna, has over a million listeners. The Department of
2.18.2 Extension- Government or Non-Government or Semi-Government or
Autonomous or Private Agency Linkage
2.18.2.1 DAE-AIS Linkage

AIS Agricultural Extension has initiated the reaching the farmers through modern and timely
extension messages to the farmers by initiating the agronomical information and
communication center (AICC) at the IPM or ICM Club. AIS have set up 'Agri-Call Center' from
where farmers can get specific agricultural information services by dialing 16123 through the
mobile phones. In addition, through AIS-DAE collaboration Agricultural documentary,
Extension Message, Agriculture Diary, SAAO Diary etc. are being published and Radio and
Television Programmes on agriculture is being broadcasted. AIS promotes information or
extension messages of DAE. The extension program or activities will be expanded and the
dynamism will increase with the strengthening of DAE-AIS links and strong ties.
The Department of Agricultural Extension will encourage farmers-farmer links to transfer
technologies. There are many farmers among the other who are technically advanced,
innovative or ideal farmers or early adopter. The field staff of the Department of Extension will
find out such ideal farmers and enroll them and play an active role in enhancing the ideal
Farmers-Farmer’s cooperation in extension of agricultural technologies.
The market activity of the agricultural produces and market price has a direct effect on the
extension works. Lack of proper marketing system and assurance of getting appropriate price
have negative impact on the application of agricultural technology and its sustainable
dimension. In this situation, extension workers will also help the farmers to get appropriate
price and regarding market linkage process.
Effective information and strategies to create market connections are not yet good enough. A
comprehensive link between the Department of Agricultural Extension and the Department
of Agricultural Marketing can be established to determine the effective and specific action
strategies to create market connectivity and there could be research on related issues. The
department of agricultural extension can take initiative to formulate a policy in the light of
agricultural market linkage.
The extension-research-education-farmer-market linkages and coordination will play an
important role in increasing productivity and production of agriculture.
Extension-research-education-peasant-market related institutions or individuals will work
jointly and establish a sustainable and orderly market system by establishing a deep linkage in
receiving appropriate prices of production and the development of market system.
2.18.3 Extension – Ideal Farmers -Farmers Linkage
2.18.4 Extension - Agricultural Market Linkage
2.18.5 Extension-Research-Education-Farmer-Market Linkage
Management of Agricultural Extension

Extension-research-education-farmer-market linkage and coordination structure are shown
below (Figure 4):
Figure 4: Linkage among Extension, Research, Education, Farmer and the Market
2.18.6 Linkage Between Extension and the Meteorological Department
2.19.1 Undertake Timely Extension Activities
The agricultural work is intensely related to the weather. The importance of weather in
agriculture has been increasing rapidly due to climate change. It is a special responsibility of
the Department of Agricultural Extension to inform the farmers about the daily information
related to weather forecasts. Especially, farmers can take special efforts to protect their field
crops in natural disasters when they are informed about weather forecasts. Attack of pest and
disease and severity of attack in crops is controlled due to the weather and the farmers can
take cautious measures in time. Therefore, DAE have to play an active role in establishing
linkage and good relations with the Meteorological Department.
Present and future agriculture extension will not be limited only to crop production
operations. Supplemental activities will increase the coverage of commercial agriculture,
agricultural market linkage, value chain, and supply chain. In addition to this, the current
2.19 Modernization in Extension Activities
Market
Education
Research
Farmers
Consumer
demand
Extension

target is exportable, safe and high-value crop production. The Department of Agricultural
Extension will play the role of timely implementation extension activities in wide areas.
The importance of e-extension in current digital era and agricultural development is
immense. The Department of Agricultural Extension will give special importance to the e-
extension service programmes and will play a significant role in providing all the need-based
services including extended extension services to the farmers using online, off-line
technology in the shortest possible time.
Extension workers can play a role in extension activities using social networking, such as
creating 'Face Book Group' with farmers, can coordinate various extension technologies,
market rates, availability of agricultural inputs etc. e-extension services can be easily popular
by creating and using mobile applications. It will be easy to provide extension services to the
farmers of the backward areas especially in the short run and in the same time for a large
number of farmers if the e-extension service became popular.
The Department of Agricultural Extension may take initiative to popularise e-extension
services by formulating and implementing project.
Department of Agricultural Extension has already been gradually moving ahead with e-
extension services by providing e-extension services on the ground level through mobile
phone, sim card, smart phone, tablet PC, laptop supply and internet connection through
project support and partnership activities. The Department has inserted several
informational services box and important links to expand its own website www.dae.gov.bd
which is contributing to the extension program. e-Extension services box and important links
include:
e-extension service box
a.
Crop Production Technology
i.
Cereal crops
ii.
Pulses, oil and spices
iii. Vegetables and tuber crops
iv. Fruits, flowers and cash crops
e.
E-extension Service
i.
Farmer's window ( Krishaker Janala)
ii.
The digital address of the farmer
iii. e-pesticide prescription
c.
Agricultural Decision Support
i.
On-line fertilizer recommendations
2.19.2 e-Extension Services
Management of Agricultural Extension

ii.
Bangladesh Rice Production Technology Knowledge Bank
iii. Rice Crop Manager
iv. Rice Doctor, IRRI
d.
Important links includes
i.
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute
ii.
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute.
Radio and television are very important media to promote extension messages. Community
radio and non-governmental or public national and local TV channels can be used more than
before in promotional activities on extension messages.
It is undeniable that female farmer play an important role in agriculture. But the participation
of female farmers in the activities of DAE did not increase, the effect of the application of
modern agricultural technology in their activities is not noticeable. In order to develop
women's capabilities in agriculture, they need to be involved in extension activities more
efficiently and have to be educated in modern technical knowledge and work.
Surveillance is the proper way to analyse the presence of pest and diseases and the
probability of attack in crops. Sometimes, there is a great loss of crops due to the severe attack
of any pest in a favorable environment before knowing about its presence. Effective measures
can be ensured to safeguard the crops by knowing the presence of these harmful pests and
forecasting their attack by surveillance. So, vigilant surveys in crop field will be considered as
an essential activity of the DAE. The surveillance activity will be conducted under supervision
of the Director, Plant Protection Wing with special emphasis on weekly basis following the
surveillance policy and the Director; Plant Protection Wing will submit the summary of weekly
survey to the Director General.
Pest management is a very good way to control the presence and attack of pest and diseases.
Pest management will be considered as an essential activity of the DAE. Extension workers will
be well aware of pest management and will take effective actions in the light of this
knowledge. Note that, perching is a very simple, effective and cost-effective technique in pest
2.20 Strengthening of Female Farmer's Participation in Extension
Work
2.21 DAE’s Increased Engagement in Essential Activities Including
Pest Surveillance and Pest Management

management. The Director of the Plant Protection wing will take all measures effectively to
make perching popular.
Surveillance and pest management is one of the most important functions of the Plant
Protection Wing. Therefore, the Director, Plant Protection Wing will be conducting surveys
and pest management activities with full monitoring and supervision.
Farmers collect their required agricultural inputs like fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, etc. directly
from sellers or dealers. It is necessary for the sellers or dealers to know the quality of these
materials. Often, the sellers or dealers give advice to farmers about the methods of
application of these inputs. Therefore, the sellers or dealers need sufficient technical
knowledge regarding the selection and application procedures of input. In addition, honesty
and transparency of business is also important. Therefore, the Department of Extension will
play an active role in developing the technical capacity of inputs dealers or dealers through
training and monitoring on overall affairs.
Different persons or organizations related to agricultural services work with farmers and
provide inadequate advice to farmers for their interests or perform unreasonable tasks, such
as the manager of irrigation schemes or relevant personnel to irrigation water distribution
system, agricultural machinery mechanic, field worker of pesticide or fertilizer companies ,
Market development officers of pesticides or fertilizer companies and pesticides spraying
related non-government persons. DAE will monitor the work-activity of these people working
in the field level. The DAE take initiatives to develop the skills of relevant people, agricultural
machinery mechanics or other agriculture service providers through training and request the
concerned authorities by issuing conditions for the development of the skills of persons of
different organizations.
It is to be noted that some private or autonomous companies are engaged in promotional
activities including setting demonstrations on the field regarding agricultural use for
experimental or commercial purposes without the approval of the DAE, there may be
confusion among the farmers in many cases and farmers can be harmed by the misuse of
technologies. No non-government or privately-owned organization will take active action in
the promotional activities including the demonstration on the use of agricultural inputs for
experimental or commercial purposes on the field without the approval of DAE headquarters.
Extension workers working in the field level will perform effective responsibilities in
monitoring related issues.
2.22 Skill Development
2.22.1 Technical Capacity Development of Input Sellers/Dealers
2.22.2 Monitoring and Development of the Capacities of the People or
Organization Related to Agricultural Services
Management of Agricultural Extension

2.22.3 Skill Development of Extension Workers and Farmers
2.23.1 Fortnightly Visit Schedule for SAAO
In recent years, agricultural work has become more complex due to climate change,
environmental imbalance, and declining land fertility. In addition, the paradigm of modern
agriculture extension has been expanding. Modern farming technologies are also being
developed in conjunction with every situation. Past meditative concepts and skills are
incomprehensible for recent agriculture. Therefore, the skill development of the DAE
extension officials is prime concern and the farmer’s skill will develop if the efficiency of the
extension officials develops. There is no alternative to training in skill development. So, DAE
will increase and strengthen the training jurisdiction of extension officers and farmers.
The Principle of the "Revised Extension Approach" is to work with farmers groups. SubAssistant Agriculture Officers will mainly work with the DAE farming group, if necessary, the
old farmer groups of DAE will be reconstituted and new farmer groups will be formed (Chapter
6). In this case, farmer’s field schools will be converted into the effective farmer group.
Details of the SAAO's fortnightly visits
a.
A fortnightly visit schedule will be prepared including activities of two weeks or 14
calendar days
b.
A SAAO's work description of two weeks or 14 calendar days is mentioned below:+
i.
During the14 working days (two weeks), SAAO will meet with minimum 12 (two
per day) farmers groups within 6 working days in the group's scheduled meeting
place at the first half of the day and provide services to farmers of Farmer
Information Advice Centre established at block or union parishad in the afternoon.
ii.
SAAO will attend the meeting or training of the Upazila Office on 2 working days
iii. SAAO will conduct farmer meeting at Union Digital Centre (UDC) and the unattended
farmers’ group meetings if any or special work of projects or setting demonstration
or other work will be done on two working days. Will be ready to use the existing IT
(Computer, Internet) facility in the farmers meeting at the Digital Centre.
iv. Enjoy four-day weekly holidays.
c.
The place of every farmers' group meeting will be determined by the choice of
members of the group
d.
There will be an attractive signboard of reasonable size at the venue, the signboard will
include the name of the meeting place, the time of the meeting: For example, 9 am in
the morning on Sunday of the 1st and 3rd week of every english month, the name of
the SAAO, the mobile number of the SAAO etc.
2.23 Fortnightly Visit Schedule of Sub-Assistant Agriculture
Officers (SAAO) and their Training

e.
SAAO will visit their field along with their meeting with the members on a scheduled
day of visiting a farmers group.
f.
In the meeting, the SAAO will perform duties as a facilitator and mentor on other
topics or issues given by the formal training of the Upazila Office.
g.
Fortnightly formal training of SAAOs will be held on any scheduled day of the 1st and
3rd week of the month in the upazila office, counting the days of the visit will start from
the day after training
h.
The daily working hours of the SAAO in the block will be around 9.00am to 5.00pm.
Fortnightly Visit Schedule of SAAO*** as example is given below:
*** 1. In the visit schedule, timings for meetings
visits of SAAO with farmers group and
attending farmer information and advice centres can be changed or adjusted only in
order to ensure maximum participation of farmers. But these changes will be limited
to working days. Concerned Upazila Agriculture Officer will take approval of the
Additional Director of the region through the district supervisor for arranging a change
in schedule or visit with the farmers group and attendance at the Farmer Information
and Advice Centre with appropriate explanation, otherwise the revised timings will
not be considered effective.
or
Day
1st Week
Day
2nd Week
9.00-12.00
12.00-3.00
3.00-5.00
9.00-12.00
12.00-3.00
3.00-5.00
Formal Training at Upazila Office
Meeting/Informal Training at Upazila Office
Weekly Holiday
Weekly Holiday
Weekly Holiday
Weekly Holiday
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Farmer’s
Information
and Advice
Centre
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Farmers
Group 8
Farmers
Group 10
Farmers
Group 12
Farmers
Group 7
Farmers
Group 9
Farmers
Group 11
Farmers
Group 1
Farmers
Group 3
Farmers
Group 5
Farmers
Group 2
Farmers
Group 4
Farmers
Group 6
Meeting with Farmers at UDC and
Project work/Establishment of
Demonstration/Others
Meeting with Farmers at UDC and
Project work/Establishment of
Demonstration/Others
Management of Agricultural Extension

2. The SAAO's fortnightly visit schedule is prepared considering the “Training and Visit
System (considered as the basis of the extension program of the Department of
Agricultural Extension) which is consistent with the principles and conditions of
'Revised Extension Approach. This visit schedule will mitigate fault of the training and
Visit (T & V) system, for example -
i. Farmers’ group-based approach instead of a personal contact
ii. Providing demand-based bottom-up extension services to farmers instead of topdown following the principle of decentralization
iii. Conducting fortnightly programmes ensures the participation of all the membersfarmers in the decision-making process to implement information related extension and
extension programmes as it is group based, which support the participative principle.
iv. Emphasis has been laid on both training and visit, which will help to fulfil the
information demand of the farmers and improve the efficiency of extension workers.
v. Extension workers will be able to work with farmers groups more efficiently.

3. SAAO's fortnightly visit program is a revised arrangement for the implementation of
the extension programme. It needs to do hard work in the initial stage of any change.
All the persons concerned, especially the upazila, district and zonal level officials, will
be able to play a special efficient, competent and effective role in the change
management activities by providing proper training to SAAO.
i.
The visit of SAAO will be completed in accordance with the schedule or work cycle,
therefore the visit and execution of the SAAO’s field work will be highly disciplined and
measurable
ii.
The members of the group do not need to give any advance notice about the SAAO's
visit as it is prescheduled, no additional work and responsible person will be required
for providing advance notice
iii. Members of the group will be able to attend their meetings with preparation on the
basis of their needs in advance due to fixed schedule and will be able to gain access to
demand-based services
iv.
It will be easier to collect the real information needs of farmers which will be used to
formulate and implement need based extension plan for the farmers
v.
The training message will be locally suitable and the farmers need-based because it is
locally created
vi. It will not be necessary for the SAAO to make a fortnightly advance visit schedule and
prior approval by the supervisor
vii. Monitoring of the activities of SAAOs by using Mobile Apps will be facilitated in
addition to field visits
2.23.2. Advantages of Working under Definite Visit Schedule

viii. All farmers and everyone concerned will be aware of SAAO's presence in the block, so
it will be easy for any farmer to get help from SAAO
ix. The SAAO activities will be more dynamic by following the schedule, it will improve
efficiency and increase capacity
x.
Due to visit following fixed fortnightly schedule, DAE connectivity and relationship
with the members of the group will be strengthened; as a result, the sustainability of
the farmers group will be strengthened and sustainable.
Sub- Assistant Agriculture Officers will meet in the meeting or training at the Upazila
Agriculture Office on specific day of the week with the following agenda:
i.
Upazila Agriculture Officer will set up a day of the week for meeting or training by the
discussion and approval with the Deputy Director of the district.
ii.
Training or meeting may be held on different working days of the week in different
upazilas of the district in order to supervise and coordinate the district level officials.
iii. 1st week: there will be formal training on the subject relevant to 1st fortnight time or
related to field situation or farmer’s demand on the selected day of the week,
Agricultural extension officer will be full responsible for the training, short-form
training massage will be distributed to SAAOs in the training.
iv.
2nd week: Discussion, review and report submission on field activities at the meeting
held in the upazila office and informal training of sub-assistant agricultural officials.
v.
3rd week: there will be formal training on the subject relevant to 2nd fortnight time or
related to field situation or farmer’s demand on the selected day of the week,
Agricultural Extension officer will be full responsible for the training, short-form
training massage will be distributed to SAAOs in the training.
vi. 4th week: Discussion, review and report submission on field activities at the meeting
held in the upazila office and informal training of sub-assistant agricultural officials.
•
Sub- Assistant Agriculture Officers will have separate time for informal training
and discussion, review and review of ongoing training messages will be made in
informal training programmes.
The steps of creating training messages are as follow:
i.
The training message will be timely, relevant to the situation in the field and need
based; the message will include the introduction of new technologies, special
extension programmes, soil health and fertility preservation techniques (organic
2.23.3 Fortnightly Meeting or Training of SAAO
2.23.4 Fortnightly Training Message of SAAO
Management of Agricultural Extension

matter and protection of micro-nutrient and development), crop production
managing drought, flood and salinity etc.
ii.
The Agricultural Extension Officer will prepare the draft of the training message in the
light of the ongoing extension programmes and submit it to the Upazila Agriculture
Officer for verification.
iii. Upazila Agriculture Officer will send it to the Deputy Director of the District Training
Officer after verification and revision
iv.
District Training Officer will return to upazila before the training day with the approval
of the Deputy Director after the necessary changes, modification and amendment to
the training message sent from the upazila.
Sub- Assistant Agriculture Officers play an important role in the development of agriculture
and farmers by working directly with the farmers. Farmers have become very prosperous in
agricultural technologies and knowledge with the change of time, agricultural work is
becoming more complex due to the changing climate and environment, and new
technologies are being invented for the needs of the people. Accordingly, there is a need to
make extension services expeditious. Therefore, the ability of SAAOs to ensure appropriate
and efficient extension services with nature, environment and conditions is absolutely
essential. The training programmes of the upazila must be equipped in such a way that SAAO
can increase their capacities by taking need-based and timely training.
Activities for Increasing Capability of SAAOs
i.
The SAAO training programmes to be held in upazila level must be very effective and
fruitful
ii.
Work of SAAOs at the block level should be closely monitored and corrections should
be made by proper guidance
iii. The SAAOs will have to make sincere efforts to fulfil their responsibilities, so that their
skills are improved in the process of learning by doing
iv.
Develop the knowledge of SAAO on modern technologies and contemporary issues
v.
Develop competence of SAAOs for working with farmers or farmers groups of all
classes and management of field activities
vi. The best SAAOs should be rewarded so that attentiveness, enthusiasm and skill are
created in their work from the encouragement.
i. District Training Officer will be in charge of coordinating and monitoring SAAO training
program at upazila level
2.23.5 Increasing Skills of SAAO
2.23.6. Coordination and Supervision of SAAO Training Programme

ii. The District Training Officer will take all possible efforts to make SAAO training effective
iii. At least one officer of the district level will be present in every training programme to
make the training meaningful and effective in the upazila level, the Deputy Director of
the concerned district will ensure this
iv. The District Training Officer will take necessary action to increase the skills of the
concerned officers in order to make the training effective and fruitful
v. DAE Director of Training Wing will carry out the responsibility of overall coordination,
monitoring and supervision from the national level on the training programs of SAAO,
creating training messages and increasing capacity.
There is a room allocation for SAAO in every Union Parishad Complex. Allocated this room will
be considered as farmers information and advice centre. In NATP-registered Upazilas, it has
been known as FIAC. The Farmer Information and Advice Centre will get the form of an ideal
service centre for providing integrated services to the farmers on their needs. This service
centre will be equipped with various information related to agriculture as well as ‘Pest
Museum’ or ‘Plant Doctor’s Clinic’.
The activities of agricultural information and counseling centres can be conducted from the
old Union Parishad building or any place conveniently located in the union where there is no
union parishad complex.
The diary of SAAO is a government document and it is a very important tool for recording the
daily routine of information and extension activities. The SAAO diary will contain an annual
agricultural development plan for the relevant area at the beginning. The farmer information
needs and identified problems recorded in the diary will be considered seriously in the
formulation of extension plan.
Monitoring of SAAO's activities and field situation can be done through SAAO diary
observation and it is helpful to know the problem of the farmers and take necessary action.
Supervising officers should monitor and ensure that the SAAOs are using diaries properly.
The first point of the task of executing extension activities is to record and self-assess the
information about the daily work of extension workers and how much of daily work was done.
2.23.7 Farmer Information and Advice Centre
2.23.8 SAAO Diary
2.24 Ensuring Accountability in Extension Work
Management of Agricultural Extension

The accountability of work can be ensured by performing all the duties assigned to all
extension officials and active monitoring in every level like block, upazila, district and region.
The most important level of the Department of Agricultural Extension is Block level. SubAssistant Agriculture Officers are working as spokesmen of the Department of Agricultural
Extension who are engaged in the most responsible posts of the block and trying to fulfil their
assigned duties. The concerned block farmers will be deprived of the promised services of the
Department of Extension if there is a deficit in the duty of the Sub- Assistant Agriculture
Officer, which will result in hampering the achievement of the mission of the Department of
Agricultural Extension. Therefore, every Sub-Assistance Agricultural Officer must be bound to
perform his duties in the block and the performed work will be added to his own assessment
and accountable to the farmers.
Upazila level officials will be committed to performing their duties and will take accountable
responsibilities. The main work of the upazila officials is to ensure that the need for extension
services is provided to the farmers and monitor the work done by the Sub- Assistant
Agriculture Officer. Upazila officials will impose special emphasis on the following areas of
supervision of the field and will verify the amount and quality of the work done:
i.
Field visits and farmers interviews
ii.
Establish good relations with the farmers group and verify the quality of the work done
by the SAAO in the group
iii. Quality and quantity of work done by SAAO
iv.
Connection, contact, relationship with the farmers or farmer groups or organizations
with SAAOs
v.
SAAO field visits
vi. Monitoring of SAAO's diary and provide instructional comments
vii. Implementation progress of approved extension plan
viii. Achievement or implementation situation of departmental or project work
ix. Follow-up of project related implementation programmes
x.
Assigned special programs
xi. Accuracy of various reports submitted etc.
It should be taken into consideration with special importance if there is any problem in
agriculture in monitoring and supervision and if there is negligence or shortage of SAAO
efficiency observed in the responsibilities then it is necessary to remove it as soon as possible
through appropriate patronage.
2.24.1 Block Level
2.24.2 Upazila Level

2.24.3 District and Region Level
2.24.4 Online Movement Data Entry of Region, District and Upazila-Level
Officials
District and regional officials will perform very specific and deeply monitoring activities. They
will put special emphasis in monitoring on the issues mentioned above and ensure
accountability to the subordinates. Upazila and block level activities are largely dependent on
the direction, monitoring and supervision work given by the region and district level.
Working area can be divided among the officers working in the upazilas and districts for the
purpose of supervision. Every officer should be aware that the supervision work is the most
meaningful and effective.
Upazilas, district and regional officials will use a checklist to supervise. The Director of Field
Services wing will provide checklist samples for the regional, district and upazila considering
the ongoing work conditions and importance. Every officer will prepare monthly report in the
prescribed form and submit it with necessary recommendation or comment to the next
senior officer within 5th of next month. Samples of the monthly report template will be
provided by Field Services Wing.
A possible index of how many days to go to the field for observing and monitoring by the
upazilas, district and regional level officials is given below (Table 2):
Regional, district and upazila level officials have to travel outside of their own head office in
government work. They also go out of the workplace in various activities. Higher authority
Table 2: Minimum Monthly Field Visits for Supervision by Officials
Upazila
Assistant Agricultural Extension Officer
Upazila
Agricultural Extension Officer
Upazila
Additional Agriculture Officer
Upazila
Upazila Agriculture Officer
District
Additional Deputy Director
District
District Training Officer
District
Deputy Director
Region
Deputy Director
Region
Additional Director
Sl no
Administrative level
Designation of the officer
Number of minimum visits
Management of Agricultural Extension

often needs to know the whereabouts of the region, district and upazila level officials.
Therefore, on-line movement data entry systems will be introduced for the region, district and
upazila level officials to maintain movement data. Officer of the regional, district and upazila
level will go on the outside of the work place after recording his details about movement so
that any senior authority can be informed about the movements of each officer at any time.
All officers and the SAAO will prepare daily performance report in order to verify the amount
of work done and to ensure accountability and submit the short and accurate or meticulous
monthly report of daily performance to the next higher authority in the 10 days of next
month. The senior authority will review the submitted report and verify the quality of the
work and its effectiveness and provide the necessary suggestions for the improvement in the
quantity and quality of the work done.
Everyone wants to be rewarded for the good work, at least they expect thanks. Recognizing
satisfying work increases trust and respect for the responsibility and helps to be more
responsible for the purpose. Moreover, recognition gives rise to competition among the
workplace. Therefore, good work must be recognized and rewarding opportunities should be
created for good work.
The steps in evaluation and rewarding of SAAO's performance will be as follows:
i.
The quality, quantity of executed works and personal characteristics of the SAAOs in
the assessment process will be verified
ii.
The work of the SAAO will be assessed 3times a year in per quarter in order to maintain
perfect evaluation and speed of work over the years.
iii.
Every time Upazila Agriculture Officer, Additional Agriculture Officer and Agricultural
Extension Officer individually will score the quality, quantity and personal characteristics
of the SAAO's work on the basis of specific indicators.
iv.
Upazila Agriculture Officer will secretly save the average scoring account with
quarterly assessment sheets
v.
Then at the end of the year, the best three SAAOs will be selected in the upazilas by
determining 1st place, 2nd place and 3rd place on the basis of the average calculation
of three assessments
vi. Certificates will be distributed among the winners in January next year for recognition
of excellence
vii. Certificates will be prepared in the joint signature of the Additional Director of the
region and the Deputy Director of the district
2.25 Performance Report by All DAE Officials
2.26 Evaluation of Officials’ Performance and Awards
2.26.1 Assessment for the Work of SAAO and Reward

viii. The Additional Director of the region and the Deputy Director of the district will be
present in the certification ceremony
ix.
Sample of the certificate will be provided by the Director of the DAE, Field Services Wing.
District and upazila level officials will also be awarded for their outstanding quality work
similar to 2.22.1.
The officer from the headquarters of the Department will be assigned in the beginning of
the programme for observation and monitoring the real ground situation of seasonal
extension programme, agricultural rehabilitation programme, agricultural incentive
programme and various development activities of each district. Employed or assigned officers
will visit the field of the district on the basis of the scheduled activities and observe the real
situation and take immediate action when any obstruction is seen.
The assigned officials will submit the meaningful and objective inspection report to the
Director General and the Director of the Field Services Wing after the completion of each
inspection. The necessary measures will be taken from the headquarters according to the
report submitted.
Additional Director of the region is responsible for technical auditing. Technical inspection is
needed to strengthen supervision. Additional Directors regularly visit upazilas and districts for
supervision. Technical audits will be completed every season. A special checklist will be used
to monitor the extension works carried out in addition to the general supervision system in
technical evaluation. Additional Directors will select a district for technical inspection. Three
upazilas will be selected on the basis of random selection and two blocks in each upazila in the
same process during the visit of selected districts for the evaluation and the evaluation will
follow the specific check list. The Additional Directors will also similarly complete the
technical audit of all the districts affiliated.
2.26.2 Assessment and Award for Work of Upazila or District Level Officials
2.27.1 Appointment of Headquarter Officer in Monitoring of Field Level
Extension and Development Activities
2.27.2 Technical Audit
2.27 Monitoring, Supervision and Administrative Management
Management of Agricultural Extension

The standard and quantity of extension services provided at the field level is known by the
technical inspection. The results of the audit are particularly effective in providing constructive
guidance and capacity building to field staff.
The smooth implementation of extension activities might reduce due to proper monitoring
and lack of supervisory activities. Administrative steps or administrative management may be
required in order to ensure responsible, transparent and accountability in monitoring and
supervisory activities. The officials of the administration of the national, region, district and
upazila will take effective measures in this regard. The DAE may issue administrative
instructions or guides or publish an administrative manual.
DAE Headquarters will take initiative to improve the quality of extension services. Extension
service quality development cell will be formed comprising of skilled officers from all the
wings of the headquarters headed by the Director, Field Services Wing, to check the quality
and improvement of extension services in the field level. At least 15 people will be members of
this cell. Director, Field Services Wing will coordinate the member as the chief or convener of
the cell. Districts will be distributed among the members. The assigned officer (member)
against the districts will check the quality of extension services by visiting the block-level
extension activities on the basis of random selection. Members-officer will submit the
quarterly report to the Director, Field Services Wing every July and January, which will be the
special agenda of discussion at the next DAE management committee meeting and the
decision will be taken to improve the quality of extension services.
There is a control room at the headquarters of the Department of Agricultural Extension. The
control room is open from 9 am to 8 pm on every working day. It is kept open on weekly
holidays in emergency or special circumstances. The control room plays a very effective and
important role in the exchange of information from all levels of the field.
The effectiveness of the control rooms will be applicable in every upazila, district and region
level like the headquarters. The control room will also be used as an information centre.
2.27.3 Administrative Management in Effective Implementation of Extension
Activities
2.29.1 Increase the Effectiveness of Control Rooms in Fields
2.28 Formation of Quality Improvement Cell for Extension Services
2.29 DAE’s Information Management to Strengthen Programmes
Supportive to Extension Work

The control room or information centre will be active at any natural disaster or emergency or
as per the requirement and will play an effective role as the control room of the head office.
All information will be preserved in the control room or information centre so that any data or
report is available on demand.
All reports of the Department of Agricultural Extension will be communicated through the
on-line system. Therefore, the Director of Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing and
DAE control room will play an active role in this regard. All regions, districts and upazila will
take effective measures in this regard.
The online reporting format will be prepared according to the needs of the concerned wing or
project and Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing will add this to the on-line system.
In the meantime, effective action has been taken to communicate the report on fertilizer,
rainfall, crop cultivation progress, crop stage situation, etc. through the online system on the
DAE website. The highest importance will be given on e-mail technology as well as the DAE's
website to provide different reports or information.
In addition, the DAE will take initiatives for effective use of the off-line system (Mobile APP) for
brief information or report transactions. Currently, the SMS of mobile phones has gained
popularity among the people, and its use has to be gradually increased. DAE will try to make
full application of information and communication technologies in the current digital era to
communicate all types of information.
The Department of Agricultural Extension has been performing various tasks with great
success. The proper record or documentation of these works is encouraging and displayable.
DAE will give special attention to the continuous preservation of success stories and
publication of annual report. All wings of the department will collect information about the
success stories and documentation in the year so that there is no shortage of information
about the concerned issues. It will be a regular process.
The Department of Agricultural Extension will create a cell by Planning, Implementation and
ICT wing to undertake the annual report on all the work done by the Department of
Agricultural Extension and the cell will take necessary actions to create documentation and
preservation. The Department of Agricultural Extension will publish the annual report every
financial year.
2.29.2 Online Reporting System
2.29.3 Documentation of Extension Work
Management of Agricultural Extension

2.29.4 Creation of Database
2.29.4.1 Department of Agricultural Extension
The Department of Agricultural Extension will incorporate all the information of its wings and
create a complete data base. The information will be of immense importance in all other
activities including the decision making process for preparing any extension plan and
implementation of any plans related to agriculture. The data base will include many
information from other related agriculture institutions such as BADC, research institutes etc.
ICT section of Planning, Project Implementation and ICT wing will be responsible for the
management and control of the data base. The other wing of the department will provide
information to the ICT section.
"Technology Archive" will be an important feature of data base where the details of all types of
technology related to agriculture will be preserved.
Besides, information about the database is as follows:
i.
General information on agriculture (region, district, upazila)
ii.
Statistics of all the cultivation and production of crops (region, district, upazila based
past few years)
iii.
Common cropping pattern and change or replacement of crop pattern in the last 20 years
iv.
Irrigation areas, number of irrigation devices
v.
Details about project-based work areas and extension activities
vi. Loss-damage details of natural disaster and implemented rehabilitation and incentive
programme
vii. Details of areas and production under the popular varieties of crops ( regions, districts,
upazilas)
viii. Crop zoning related information
ix. The details of crop production cost
x.
List of technologies that are popular and commonly used in crop fields
xi. Detailed information on training of officers or employees at home and abroad
xii. Details of manpower related information of the Department of Extension
xiii. Agricultural input assistance card and farmer bank account
xiv. Farmer data base etc.

2.29.4.2 Organizations Related to Agriculture
i.
Supply and distribution of variety-wise seeds by the BADC (last few years)
ii.
The source of getting various agricultural inputs
iii. The situation of supply of other inputs including agricultural machineries by various
non-government organizations
iv.
Information on use of various types of fertilizers (the past few years)
v.
Details of the use of all types of agricultural equipment including irrigation (last few
years) etc.
The government is preparing different policies, laws, rules, plans, strategy letters etc. as per
different agricultural development initiatives. The Department of Extension will always try to
implement these policies, laws, rules, plans, strategies in the extension programme.
Some of the policies, laws, rules, plans and strategies made by the government are-

i.
New Agricultural Extension Policy
ii.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
iii. National Agriculture Policy
iv.
Coastal Region Policy
v.
Integrated Pest Management Policy
vi. Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan
vii. Fertilizer (management) Law
viii. National Women Development Policy
ix.
Fertilizer (management) rules
x.
Groundwater Management Rules
xi.
Pesticide Rules
xii. Seventh Five-Year Plan
xiii. Recruiting fertilizer dealer and fertilizer distribution policy
xiv. Master Plan for Agricultural Development in Southern Region of Bangladesh etc.
2.30 Following Government Policies, Laws and Rules in Extension
Work
Management of Agricultural Extension

Citizen Charter and
Information on
Accessing Citizen Rights
Chapter

Agricultural Extension Manual 55
3.1 Vision and Mission
3.2 Promise of Services
3.1.1 Vision:
3.1.2 Mission:
3.2.1 Citizen Services
Sustainable and profitable production of crops.
Developing the technological knowledge and skills of farmers by providing
efficient, effective, decentralised, location-specific, need-based and integrated agricultural
extension services to increase the production of sustainable and profitable crops.
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights
Providing
agricultural
advice
Provide
agricultural
equipment
through
development
assistance
7 working
days
45 working
days
Free
70% Cash
Payment of
the value
of the
device
Providing agricultural
advice on receiving
demand and in cases
applicable
conducting field
visit/ training/
demonstration/field
day/group meeting
Providing up to 30%
development
assistance for
purchasing
agricultural
machinery in order
to achieve
agricultural
mechanisation
Upazila Agriculture
Officer, concerned
upazila agriculture
office
1. Upazila
Agriculture Officer,
concerned upazila
agriculture office
2. Project Director,
Field Services Wing,
Phone: (2) 9102841
Received Demand
(personal
communication, SMS,
Telephone / Mobile
Call, E-Mail)
*Provide suggestions
*Application received
* Approval of Upazila
committee
* Approval of Project
Implementation
Committee
*Order issuance and
transfer
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
-
Application in the prescribed
form,
concerned Upazila Agriculture
Office

Mushroom
cultivation
advice and
mother seed
(spwan) supply
Provide
Agriculture
Diploma
Education
Registration of
fertilizer and
fertilizer related
products import
3 working
days
subject to
reserves
According
to
Education
year-wise
notification
30 working
days
Cash
Payment of
15 / - per
mother
seed
Cash
payment of
the fixed
government
fee
1000 / -,
through
treasury
invoice/
challan
Provide suggestion
on mushroom
cultivation for the
nutrition and
empowerment of
women and supply
seeds (spawn)
provide training /
demonstration /
group meetings /
motivation /
technical help /
spawn supply /
leaflets / booklets /
brochure / posters /
journals in applicable
cases
Provide 4-year
Agricultural Diploma
degree Under the
Technical Education
Board of Bangladesh
Registration of
fertilizers and related
material import to
ensure quality
fertilizer supply at
farmers' level
-
Application in the prescribed
form
ATI's offices
www.dae.gov.bd
1. Application in the prescribed
form
2. Other documents mentioned
in the application form are
available in the form of Field
Services Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
Deputy Director
(mushroom)
Phone:
(2)7742496-102
E-mail:
ddmashroom@dae.g
ov.b
Principal, ATI
related ATIs
Additional Director
(Input)
Field Services Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka
Phone: (2)9132088
E-mail:
adimplement@dae.g
ov.bd
* Demand Receipt
(Personal
communication,
SMS, Telephone /
Mobile Call, E-Mail)
Advice and mother
seed supply
Provide Training /
exhibition / party
meeting /
motivation /
technical assistance
/ spawn supply /
leaflet / booklet /
brochure / poster /
journal
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Students admission
* Provide Agriculture
Diploma education
* Providing certificate
Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Assessment and
related DD DAE’s
recommendations
* Provide registration
certificate
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

Registration of
production of
fertilizer and
fertilizer
related
products
Registration of
fertilizer and
fertilizer
related
materials
marketing
Renewal of
registration of
fertilizer and
fertilizer
related
products
working
days
working
days
working
days
1000 / -,
through
Treasury
invoice
1000 / -,
through
treasury
invoice
1000 / -,
through
treasury
invoice
Registration of the
production of
fertilizer and
fertilizer related
products to ensure
quality fertilizer
supply at farmers'
level
Registration of
fertilizer and
fertilizer related
material market in
the farmers' level to
ensure quality
fertilizer supply
Renewal of
registration of
fertilizer and
fertilizer related
products to ensure
quality fertilizer
supply at farmers'
level
1. Application in the
prescribed form
2. Other documents
mentioned in the
application form, Field
Services Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
1. Application in the
prescribed form
2. Other documents
mentioned in the
application form
Filed Services Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
1. Application in the
prescribed form
2. Other documents
mentioned in the
application form
Field Services Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
Additional Director
(Input) Field
Services Wing, DAE,
Khamarbar,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2)
91320208, E-mail:
adimplement@
dae.gov.bd
Additional Director
(Input)
Outreach Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka
Phone: (2)
E-mail:
adimplement@
dae.gov.bd
Additional Director
(Input)
Field Services Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka
Phone: (2)
E-mail:
adimplement@
dae.gov.bd
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Assessment and
related DD, DAE
recommendations
* Provide
registration
certificate
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Assessment and
related DD, DAE’s
recommendation
* Provide
registration
certificate
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Assessment and
related DD, DAE's
recommendations
* Provide
registration
Certificate
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Agricultural Extension Manual

Cooperation in
the
establishment
of garden on
the roof of the
house
Advice on
cultivation of
horticultural
crops and
support for
setting up
nurseries
Years wide
working
days
(year-over)
Free
At the
cash price
fixed by
the gover
nment
Provide assistance
in setting up
vegetable garden
on the roof to meet
the nutritional
demand and
provide training /
demonstration /
motivation / leaflet
/ booklet /
brochure / poster /
journal in
applicable cases
Provide
consultation and
technical support
for expansion of
horticultural crops
and establishment
of nursery and
provide training /
demonstration /
motivation / leaflet
/ booklet /
brochure / poster /
journal in
applicable cases
-
-
1. Metropolitan
Agriculture Officer
related Metro Farm
Office
2. Deputy Director
(fruit and flowers),
Horticulture Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117789
Director,
Horticulture Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (02)
9117030, E-mail:
dhw@dae.gov.bd,
Deputy Director,
Horticulture Center
Upazila Agriculture
Officer, concerned
upazila agricultural
office.
Deputy Director,
concerned District
Agriculture Office.
Additional Director,
concerned Regional
Agriculture Office.
* Demand Receipt
(Personal
Communication,
SMS, Telephone /
Mobile Call, E-
Mail)
* Inspection and
technical
assistance
Demand Receipt
(Personal
Communication,
SMS, Telephone /
Mobile Call, E-
Mail)
* Inspection and
technical
assistance
* Sapling-supply
after payment
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

Provide
Product
registration
A. Chemical
pesticide
B. Bio-Pesticide
C. Microbial
pesticide
Provide license
for Pesticide
Import
two years
or time
fixed by
the
governme
nt
working
days
20,000 / -
Treasury
invoice
2000 / -
Treasury
invoice
Provide registration
of all types of
pesticide materials
to ensure quality
pesticide supply at
the farmers' level
Provide all types of
pesticide import
licenses to ensure
quality pesticide
supply at the
farmer's level
1. Application in the prescribed
form
A. Chemical pesticide, Form 1 (a)
B. Bio-Pesticide, Form 1 (b)
C. Microbial pesticide,
Form 1 (c)
2. Other documents mentioned
in the application form
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Two-copy application for
Form-5
2. Registration certificate
3. Factory / Warehouse / Factory
place deed / Agreement
4. Bank Solvency Certificate
5. Trade license,
6. TIN Certificate
7. Certificate by local authority
8. MBBS Doctor recruitment
9. Clearence from Department
of environment
10.Fire Service provided License
11.ETP.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Farmgate,
Khamarbari, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Farmgate,
Khamarbari, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant protection
wing
* Provide
registration
certificate
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of Plant Protection
Wing
* Provide license
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system

Pesticide
Formulation
License
Pesticide
Wholesale
Licenses
working
days
working
days
5000 / -
through
treasury
invoice
1000 /-
through
treasury
invoice
Provide all types of
pesticide
formulation
licenses to ensure
quality of pesticide
supply at the
farmer's level
Provide All types of
Pesticide whole sell
licenses to ensure
quality of pesticide
supply at the
peasant level
1. Two-copy application for
Form-6, 2. Registration
certificate, 3. TIN Certificate,
4. Bank Solvency Certificate, 5.
Trade license,
6. Certificate by local
authority, 7. MBBS Doctor
Recruitment, 8. Clearance
from the Department of
Environment, 9. Fire Service
provided license, 10. Factory /
Warehouse / Factory place
deed / Agreement, 11. Factory
lay-out plan, 12. Factory
Inspection report, 13.
Chemist's recruitment
(including educational
certificates). Plant Protection
wing, DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Two copies of form 7, 2.
Registration certificate, 3.
Bank solvency certificate, 4.
Trade license, 5. TIN
Certificate.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
and district offices of the DAE.
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide license
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide license
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

Pesticide Retail
License
Pesticide
re-packing
license
working
days
working
days
300 / -
through
treasury
invoice
2000 / -
through
treasury
invoice
Provide all types of
pesticide retail
licenses to ensure
quality pesticide
supply at farmers'
level
Provide all types of
pesticide re-packing
licenses to ensure
quality pesticide
supply at farmers'
level
1. Two-copies application for
form-8
2. Trade license, 3. Store
details, 4 Citizenship
certificate.
District and Upazila offices of
DAE.
1. Two copies of form-9, 2
Registration Certificate, 3 Bank
solvency, 4 Trade license, 5.
TIN certificate, 6 Certificate by
local authority, 7. MBBS
Doctor appointment, 8.
Clearance of the Department
of Environment, 9. Fire Service
provided license, 10. Factory /
Warehouse / Factory place
deed / Agreement, 11 Factory
layout-out plan, 12 Factory
Inspection Report, 13
Chemists' appointment
(including educational
certificates).
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Additional Deputy
Director (Plant
Protection Wing)
related District
Offices
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide License
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide license
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system

Paste Control
License
Pesticide
Advertisement
licenses
Import
Permission for
Plant and plant
products (IP)
working
days
working
days
7 working
days
2000 / -
through
treasury
invoice
1000 / -
taka
through
treasury
invoice
10 / - taka
1st ton
and the
next one
tone at
taka 1 /
through
invoice
Provide all types of
pest control
licenses for plant
and plant products
Licensing for all
types of
advertisement for
buying and selling
pesticide in the
market
(Advertisement)
* Provide Import
* Permit (IP) to
ensure the import
of standardized
plant and plant
products
1. Two copies of form 10, 2.
Trade license, 3. TIN
certificate, 4 Certificates by
local authority, 5 Efficient
person recruitment (including
educational qualification
certificate), 6 Factory
inspection report, 7. Chemists'
appointment (including
educational certificates), 8
Fire-proof certification.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Two copies of form-11, 2.
registration certificate, 3 Trade
license, 4. TIN Certificate.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Application in the
prescribed form, 2. Trade
license, 3. Import registration
certificate, 4. VAT certification,
5. TIN certificate, 6. Seed
registration certificate of
agriculture ministry, 7. Copy of
treasury invoice of fees.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Deputy Director
(pesticide
administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
Deputy Director
(Pesticides
Administration)
Plant Protection
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9118594
Deputy Director
(import)
Plant Quarantine
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
E-mail:
dpqw@dae.gov.bd
and Deputy
Director of
concerned
Quarantine Centre
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide license
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation and
recommendation
of plant
protection wing
* Provide License
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation
* Provide
permission latter
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

Health
certification for
plant and plant
products (PC)
Certificate of
plant and plant
products
Special
clearance for
plant and plant
products
3 working
days
3 working
days
3 working
days
50 / - taka
/ ton and
fumigation
cost (if
required)
through
invoice
price set
by the
governme
nt
according
to the type
of goods
to be paid
through
invoice
price set
by the
governme
nt
according
to the
type of
goods
through
invoice
Health certificates
to ensure the
import and export
of standardised
plant and vegetable
products
Provide clearance
to ensure the
import and export
of quality plants
and plant products
Issuance of
clearance in
applicable cases to
ensure the import
and export of
standardized plant
and plant product
products
1. Application in the
prescribed form, 2. Trade
license, 3. Export Registration
Certificate, 4. VAT certification,
5. TIN certificate, 6. Seed
registration certificate of
Agriculture Ministry, 7. Copy
of fee in treasury invoice.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Application in the
prescribed form, 2. Import
permit, 3 Health certificates of
the exporting plant and plant
products, 4 In-voice, 5 Packing
list, 6. Bill of lading etc.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Application in the
prescribed form
2. Import permit,
3. Health certificates of the
plant and plant products of
the exporting country,
4. Airway bills / invoices, 5
Packing list, 6. LC, 7 Certificate
of origin etc.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Deputy Director
(Export)
Plant Quarantine
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
E-mail:
dpqw@dae.gov.bd
Director, Plant
Quarantine Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: 02913196
E-mail:
dpqw@dae.gov.bd
and sub-registrar,
associated
convention center
Director, Plant
Quarantine Wing,
DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9131296
E-mail:
dpqw@dae.gov.bd
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation
* Provide Health
certification (PC)
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation
* Giving clearance
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
* Evaluation
* Provide special
clearance
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system

3.2.2 Official Services
Anchorage
permit of plant
and plant
products
3 working
days
Free
Anchorage permits
to ensure the
import of quality
plant and plant
products
1. Receipt of application in the
prescribed form, 2. Ship name,
3 Product details, 4. Import
permit, 5 Bill of Lading etc.
Plant Protection Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
Deputy Director
(Import)
Plant Quarantine
Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
E-mail:
dpqw@dae.gov.bd
* Receipt of
application in the
prescribed form
Evaluation
provide
anchorage
permit
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Budget
allocation and
Money release
7 working
days
Free
Annual budget
allocation and
release of funds for
field level offices to
perform
government works
1.Allotment letter,
2.Expenditure statement.
Finance and Administration
Wing, DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka.
1. Director
(Administration &
Finance),
Finance and
Administration Wing,
DAE, Farmgate,
Khamarbari, Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9111738
E-mail:
dafw@dae.gov.bd
2. Assistant Director
(Finance), finance
and administration
Wing, DAE,
Farmgate,
Khamarbari, Dhaka.
* Demand Receipt
* Budget approval
* Budget allocation
and money
release
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents and
availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

3.2.3 Internal Services
Advance GPF
payment (up to
3rd instalment)
Approve Leave
Car / house
construction
advance
Subject to receipt
of demand,
advance GPF
payment of
government
employees (up to
3rd instalment)
Approval of
different types of
leave for
government
employees subject
to right
The government
employee's car or
house building
advance regarding
the demand
received
GPF application form, bill
register and other related
documents
Assistant Director
(Finance), DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
Application for leave
allowance, holiday
availability certificate (if
applicable) and other
related documents
Assistant Director
(Finance), Administration
and Money Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
Application and other
related documents in the
prescribed form
Assistant Director
(Finance), Administration
and Finance Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
* Demand Receipt
* Approval and
distribution
Application received
Approval
* Application
received
* Recommendations
and Advances
working
days
working
days
working
days
Free
Free
Free
1. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
1), Administration and
Finance Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117614
2. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
2), Administration and
Finance Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9102831
1. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
1), Administration and
Finance Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117614
2. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
2), Administration and
Money Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9102831
1. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
1), Administration and
Finance Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117614
2. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
2), Administration and
Finance Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9102831
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents
and availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system

Provide the
clothes for the
4th class
employees
Provide
pension and
related rent
Provide the cloth
for the 4th class
government
employees with the
demand received
Provide the
government
employees' pension
and related
allowances
regarding the
receipt of the
demand
Application for dress, bill
and related papers
Assistant Director
(Finance), Administration
and Finance Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
Application received in
the prescribed form,
pension papers
Assistant Director
(Finance), Administration
and Finance Wing, DAE,
Khamarbari, Farmgate,
Dhaka.
* Application
received
* Approval
* Collection and
supply
Application received
Approval / Advance
working
days
7 working
days
Free
Free
1. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
1), Administration and
Money Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117614
2. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
2), Administration and
Money Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9102831
1. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
1), Administration and
Money Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9117614
2. Additional Deputy
Director (Administration-
2), Administration and
Money Wing, DAE,
Farmgate, Khamarbari,
Dhaka.
Phone: (2) 9102831
Sl.
Service name
Service
timing
Service and
payment
method
Basic information
related to services
Required documents
and availability
Designated Officer
(Designation, Phone
Number and email)
The service
delivery system
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

3.2.4 E-services Provided by the Department of Agricultural Extension
(with Link)
Farmer's window
The digital address of the
farmer
E-pesticide prescription
Annual Report 2014-15
Pest Risk Analysis Report
Weekly report of field
crops
Ongoing fortnightly
production report
Crop production technology
Cereal crops
Pulses, oil and spices
Vegetables and tuber crops
Fruits, flowers and cash crops
Forms of Field Services Wing
Forms of Plant Protection Wing
Forms of Plant Quarantine Wing
On-line reporting system
Rain conditions
Crop planting situation
Fertilizer situation
Crop stage condition
Agricultural Diploma Admission
Appointment of Sub- Assistant
Agriculture Officer, 2016
Instructions for completing online
forms
3.3 What We Expect From You
SL.no
Things to do to get promised or desirable services
Completed application submission in the prescribed form (if applicable)
Payment of the necessary fees through proper way (if applicable)
Attend the meeting before the scheduled time
Full contact address (including telephone or mobile number)
Notice board
Day-to-day
phytosanitary
certificate

SI.no
When to communicate
If the officer in charge fails to
resolve the issue
If the grievance resolve officer
fails to settle the matter
If appeal officer fails to settle the
issue within the stipulated time
Contact address
Additional Director (Administration, Finance and
Support Services)
Administration and Finance Wing, DAE, Khamarbari,
Farmgate, Dhaka
Phone: (02) 9130928
Email: adadmin@dae.gov.bd
Website: www.dae.gov.bd
Director General
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE)
Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka
Phone: (02) 9140857, (02) 9140850
Email: adadmin@dae.gov.bd
Website: www.dae.gov.bd
Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Dhaka
Phone: (02) 9540100
Email: secretary@moa.gov.bd
Website: www. moa.gov.bd
Who to talk to
Grievance resolve officer
(ONIK)
Appeal officer
Secretary, Ministry of
Agriculture
3.4 Grievance Resolve System (GRS)
If you are unhappy with the service, please communicate with the officer in charge. If the office in charge fails to give you a
solution, please follow these steps to file your complaint
Settlement time limit
25 working days
30 working days
60 working days
Citizen Charter and Information on Accessing Citizen Rights

The Duties and Responsibilities
of Extension Officers of the
Department of
Agricultural Extension
Chapter

The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers
of the Department of Agricultural Extension
Director General, Grade-1, Number of Position-1
i.
To accomplish the administrative and financial activities of DAE as an administrative
head of the Department of Agricultural Extension
ii.
To design and implement DAE’s strategic planning and initiatives for e-agriculture,
modern and sustainable agricultural technologies and to enhance the production of
agricultural products
iii. To take steps for expanding the information received from agricultural research
institutions, agricultural business institutions and the international arena
iv.
To develop the socio-economic condition of Bangladesh, by taking initiatives for
making realistic national policies in the agricultural sector, and taking up new projects
and implementing and evaluating based on field level needs
v.
Making partnerships between public and private organisations related to agricultural
education, research and extension for working together
vi. Changing the agricultural technologies according to the environment and enhancing
crop production in an environment-friendly way, post-harvest management and
making plans about value addition
vii. Taking necessary initiatives to enrich the knowledge and ability of the officers and
employees of the department
viii. Taking participatory approaches for farmers to ensure development of need-based
extensional activities
ix.
To play a vital role in developing and implementing the National Agricultural Extension
Policy (NAEP) and to provide help and assistance to other extension-related organisations
x.
Coordinate among different wings of the Department, conducting activities for its
management and acting as the head of the committee formed for strategic management
xi. Review the monitoring and evaluation report on regional activities for ensuring the
success of the Department’s vision, mission statement and NAEP
xii. Review the regional annual extension plans and budget as well as endorsement
xiii. To play a crucial role in protecting all kinds of assets of the Department
xiv. To provide directives about the departmental activities and operational policies and if
needed seek the assistance of the Ministry of Agriculture
xv. Maintaining coordination with other ministries including the Ministry of Agriculture as
well as other departments and divisions.

Administration and Finance Wing
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Administration, Finance and Support Services), Grade-3,
Number of Position-1
i.
To act as the head of administration and the finance wing
ii.
To coordinate among all the wings of the Department for preparing budget
iii. To make all kinds of revenue budgets and balance expenditures under this department
iv.
Take control of the quantity of annual development budget in project proforma and assist
Planning, Project Implementation & ICT Wing to review annual development programmes
v.
To permit all kinds of revenue budget for headquarter of the department including
field level activities
vi. Ensure the audit of accounts of all departmental revenues, projects, programmes etc.
as per government policies
vii. To acquire human resources to the department and to take administrative measures
for transfer
viii. To act as the administrative head for the management of all the human resources of
the department
ix. To maintain the updated record of the movable and immovable assets of the
department and to take steps in settling disputes
x.
To take measures for collection, protection and supply of the commodities in time and
for protecting their records
xi. To take measures in case of addressing financial as well as administrative complications
of human resources of the department (officers or employees) as per public laws
xii. To maintain and allocate the vehicles received from different sources and to take them
in the transport pool or vehicle pool
xiii. To coordinate all the works of the management committee of the department
xiv. To ensure the protection and dynamism of the working environment and physical
infrastructure of the department
xv. To take roles in preparing, implementing and monitoring Project Concept Paper
according to the demand of the department
xvi. To wait upon all the directions given by superior authority.
i.
To assist the Director (Administration and Finance) in preparing the annual budget of
all the wings of the department
ii.
To help prepare the reports of all types of revenue accounts or balance under the
department
iii. To help prepare the audit of the accounts of all departmental revenue, projects,
programmes etc. according to the public conventional laws
iv.
Help to take control of the annual developmental budget mentioned in projects
proforma and assist Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing in annual
development programme readjustment
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
To present all kind of revenue budget proposals under the department before the Director
vi. Coordinate the revenue expenditure according to governmental laws by maintaining
consistency
vii. To help the Director (Administration and Finance) to take measures for collection
protection and supply of the commodities in time and for preserving the records of those
viii. To help the Director (Administration and Finance) to take measures in case of
mitigating financial as well as administrative complications of the human resource
department (officers/employees) according to public laws
ix. To help the Director (Administration and Finance) for the evaluation of any kind of
work of the human resources (officers or employees)
x.
To help the Director (Administration and Finance) in all administrative works.
i.
To take administrative measures for making a list of the empty or vacant posts of
officers and employees and for their transfer and posting for enhancement of
dynamism in the department
ii.
To ensure opportunities for the officers and employees of the department and to take
measures in case of mitigating administrative complications according to the public laws
iii. To help superiors maintain rules and disciplines
iv.
To help in administrative measures for the promotion and transfer of cadre and noncadre officers at all levels of department
v.
To file the records of all leave, timescale, selection grade, lump grant and pension
sanction of the human resources of the department
vi. To assist the Additional Director (Administration, Finance and Support Service) in all
administrative works.
i.
To collect necessary commodities in due time, ensure supply, safeguard and transfer
and take measures in case of protecting all kinds of supplies and stored products and
tools with the approval of the superior authority
ii.
To keep all information about the repair of the offices of the department including field
level office rooms and to supervise all the repair activities with the approval of the
committee
iii. To assist any kind of alleged charges against any officer and employee in lawful way
and keep updated records of the estate or assets and investigate any kind of lawsuit
regarding these
iv.
To collect and preserve updated information about the vehicles for the entitled
officers of the department
v.
To take initiatives to include TO&E to the vehicles after ending different projects of the
department
vi. To help the Additional Director (Administrative, Finance and Service) in legal activities.
Deputy Director (Administration), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Legal and Support Services), Grade-5, Number of Position-1

Deputy Director (Personnel), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Administration-1), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Administration-2), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
i.
To help the department in appointing human resources for the empty or vacant posts
and for their promotion
ii.
To collect and preserve the updated record of the officers or employees of the department
iii. To help the training wing so that it enhances the activities of the human resources of
the department
iv.
To assist the Additional Director (Administration, Finance and Support Services).
i.
To prepare and keep the records of empty or vacant posts of cadre officers of the
department
ii.
To take initiatives for helping to appoint to the vacant posts and for transfer,
promotion, dispatch and other administrative activities for the cadre officers of the
department
iii. To ensure necessary facilities for cadre officers (such as, leave, timescale, selection
grade, lump grant and pension etc.) and help resolve administrative and other
complications of the department
iv.
To help and assist the Deputy Director (Administration).
i.
To prepare and keep the records of empty posts of non-cadre officers of all sectors of
the department
ii.
To help take initiatives in case of helping to appoint to the empty or vacant posts, and
for transfer, promotion, and other administrative activities for all stages of employees
and non-cadre officers of the department
iii. To ensure necessary facilities for non-cadre officers and other employees (such as
leave, timescale, selection grade, lump grant and pension etc.) and to help resolve
administrative and other complications of the department
iv.
To help senior officers in coordinating all projects or programmes of the department
and to maintain records
v.
To take measures for transferring human resources from development projects to
revenue section
vi. To help the Deputy Director (Administration).
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Additional Deputy Director (Legal and Support Services), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Personnel), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (PS to DG), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
i.
To help in maintaining the updated record of the movable and immovable assets of the
department and to take steps in mitigating complexities
ii.
To help assisting any kind of alleged charges against any officer and employee of the
department in lawful ways
iii. To help the Deputy Director (Legal and Support Services) in the process of managing all
kinds of vehicle, to keep updated records of them and to assist in case of purchasing
process under revenue budget of the department
iv.
To help and assist Deputy Director (Legal and Support Services) all the while.
i.
To help the Deputy Director (Personnel) to keep updated records of the officers or
workers of the department
ii.
To help the Deputy Director (Personnel) in planning to enhance the capacity of human
resources of the department
iii. To help in maintaining properly the records of the human resources of the department
iv.
To help the Deputy Director (Personnel) make a list of the employees of the
department for promotion
v.
To help the Deputy Director (Personnel).
i.
To act according to the directions of Director General and to help Director General in
his or her daily activities
ii.
To coordinate among the activities of Director General and all the wings of
department and to help implementing the programmes, communicating through
field levels
iii. To help in coordinating with different agricultural research, agricultural education
institutions including all related institutions and other government, semigovernment, non- government, autonomous, foreign aided organizations, NGOs etc.
by the Director General of the department
iv.
To schedule the time for daily visits, interviewees, offices, organizations and meetings
and to let the Director General know within due time
v.
To notify the Director General about all sent or received letters from or in the Director
General’s office.

Field Services Wing
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Monitoring and Implementation), Grade-3, Number of
Position-1
i.
To play roles in making farmers’ need-based annual crop production plans,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation with the help of field level officers and to
provide instructions for further actions.
ii.
To take necessary initiatives to achieve the cultivation and production target of crops
iii.
To make a revenue and development budget and to release money for the
headquarter and field level offices under Field Services Wing
iv.
To take measures in case of spreading or disseminating the messages received from
research institutions and other organisations to the field level
v.
To ascertain the demand of seeds, fertilizers, etc. and to send it to the ministry for final
approval
vi.
To point out the complications in case of agriculture and to take measures to solve them
vii. To take effective measures for agricultural mechanization, research on related topics
and coordinating with the business organizations
viii. To take necessary steps in case of dealing with the disasters caused by climate change
and agricultural rehabilitation and incentive programmes
ix.
To investigate and monitor the field level activities
x.
To take initiatives to enhance the skill and capability of the field level officers and
employees of DAE
xi.
To supervise, monitor and coordinate activities of all the field level projects or
programmes under implementation
xii. To play a role in making national agricultural policies and DAE’s mission, making a
citizen-charter in the light of the of DAE
xiii. To make crop cutting programmes throughout the country in coordination with BBS to
estimate the total amount of food crops produced in the country
xiv. To assist superior authority based on needs.
i.
To take charge of making the production plan of seasonal crops
ii.
To accomplish the activities related to the crop production report (CPR)
iii. To monitor season based programmes directly, marking or identifying the problems
and evaluating them
iv.
To monitor the agricultural activities in progress
v.
To take responsibilities for making DAE’s annual report and technical papers
vi. To help by supplying information in case of making DAE’s and Agricultural Ministry’s
annual report
vii. To collect information regarding the loss caused by natural disasters, preparing
agricultural rehabilitation programmes, making incentive programmes for cultivating
special kind of crops and to work for their implementation
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

viii. To arrange workshops on seasonal crop production plans
ix. To act as the controlling officer of all the activities of DAE’s control rooms
x.
To take measures to outreach weather forecast quickly
xi. To prepare the answers of the possible questions related to agriculture that can be
raised in the national parliament and to send them to the superior authority.
i.
To collect, examine and make reports of the regional production of crops
ii.
To monitor the development of the field level programme implementation based on
seasons
iii. To take effective steps to reach or achieve the target of crop cultivation and production
iv.
To perform activities related to the crop production report (CPR)
v.
To play a role in making the annual report of DAE
vi. To help by supplying information in the Agricultural Ministry’s annual report
vii. To work in different seminars held in the parliament and others held at the national level
viii. To collect information regarding the losses caused by natural disasters, help in
preparing agricultural rehabilitation or incentive programmes
ix.
To collect information of crop production programmes, monthly reports of main
crops, fertilizer distribution condition, information of rainfall and to inform the
relevant stakeholders
x.
To prepare the working papers of the season based crop production
xi.
To play a role in making the programme chart or calendar of crop production
xii. To collect information and monitor all agricultural activities throughout the country
via the control room
xiii. To act as the principal officer of control rooms and to supervise all activities of the
control room.
i.
To help by supplying all kinds of information in case of making DAE’s and the
Agricultural Ministry’s annual report ii.To take effective steps in making agricultural
mechanization and coordination among research and business organisations
iii. To play a role in using land and managing the soil and crop production survey and
making reports
iv.
To help in taking measures related to the pest management of the crops
v.
To collect information about the losses caused by natural disasters and to implement
agricultural rehabilitation or incentive programmes
vi. To analyse the progress of field level projects and to report the progress to the superior
authority
Deputy Director (Monitoring), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Implementation), Grade-5, Number of Position-1

Additional Deputy Director, Control Room, Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Agricultural Extension Officer, Control Room, Grade-9, Number of Position-2
Additional Director (Extension and Coordination), Grade-3, Number of
Position-1
Deputy Director (Extension), Grade-5, Number of Position- 1
i.
To inform the regional and district levels about the national target of crop production
ii.
To send information about agricultural inputs to the field level
iii. To collect information about the demand of inputs, its storage and market
management from field levels
iv.
To take measures to disseminate weather forecasts to the field level quickly
v.
To make reports by collecting updated information about the losses of natural
disasters and sending it to superior authorities
vi. To send any vital information from the headquarters to the field levels and vice versa
vii. To supervise the activities of other officers working in the control room
viii. To prepare reports according to the direction of the superior authority.
i.
To help exchange of information and reports of all kinds
ii.
To send informational messages from headquarters to field levels
iii. To collect other reports including the daily development of cultivating crops, stages of
crops, fertilizer reserve condition, daily rainfall, and temperature and others
iv.
To inform the emergency directives to the field level and to collect problems from field
levels
v.
To play a special role for exchanging information during calamities.
i.
To play a role in the technology extension of field level crop production
ii.
To identify the complications at the field level and to notify or inform the authority to
mitigate them
iii. To play a role in preparing and approving seasonal and annual extension plans based
on the ago-ecological zone, crop zoning and adaptation to face the effect of climate
change, etc. and implementing them at field levels
iv.
To coordinate between extension and research institutions
v.
To help the Director in administrative works
vi. To supervise the quality and quantity of extension services or activities provided in the
field level through performing technical audit.
i.
To play a role in bringing and implementing dynamism in extension of technologies for
crop production
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

ii.
To help to make extension and implement seasonal and annual extension plans based
on agroecological region, crop zoning and adaptation to face the effect of climate
change etc.
iii. To collect problems from the field levels and report on them to notify the superior
authority and to take initiatives to solve them
iv.
To prepare and present field level reports to the superior authority
v.
To help the Director for the management and administrative works within the wing
vi. To play a role in case of opinion sharing on behalf of DAE while preparing public
policies, instructions, laws and directions related to agriculture
vii. To play a role for arrangement, addition and amendment of different information in
agricultural diary of SAAO.
i.
To manage the participation of officers at trainings, workshops, seminars, etc.
ii.
To coordinate between extension and research institutes at the national level and to
take measures to spread the latest technology at the field level
iii. To prepare the field level programme report for presenting to the superior authority
iv.
To coordinate between different public or private institutions or organizations related
to agriculture
v.
Coordinate among other wings to assist the Director and the Additional Director
vi. To take relevant steps in the light of agriculture related news published in different
media.
i.
To play a role in monitoring and managing seed, fertilizer, fuel or electricity, irrigation
and other agricultural tools
ii.
To collect necessary information about agricultural tools and to preserve them for
future use
iii. To play a role in integrated soil management, to encourage the use of organic fertilizer
and to protect the soil health
iv.
To help the Director to coordinate among collaborating institutions for management
of fertilizer, seed and irrigation
v.
To play a role in solving any kind of input related problems at field levels
vi. To help the Director or the Head of the wing to preserve all the records of the section
and to prepare updated reports
vii. To monitor the marketing process of quality seeds and fertilizers
viii. To supervise the registration processes of production, import, preservation,
distribution and sales of fertilizer and similar products.
Deputy Director (Coordination), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Additional Director ( Inputs), Grade- 3, Number of Position- 1

Deputy Director (Fertilizer Management), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Seed and Other Inputs), Grade- 5, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Inputs), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
i.
To play a role in conducting activities related to fertilization
ii.
To collect all kinds of information about fertilizers and related products and to be in
charge of the preservation process and their usage
iii. To take legal measures in the registration process and renewal of importing,
production and marketing of fertilizers and related products; and to resolve any issue
related to these with the help of Director
iv.
To help the Director in coordinating among all the organizations related to fertilizer
(BADC, BCIC, SRDI, BARC etc.)
v.
To help implement decisions of the National Fertilizer Standardisation Committee or
the technical sub-committee regarding fertilizer
vi. To help the Head of the wing to prepare updated reports of fertilizer and all other
products related to it
vii. To take lawful initiatives to protect the quality of fertilizer with the directors’ suggestions
viii. To monitor and prepare the annual demand of fertilizer and related products and to
make allotment
ix. To take necessary steps for soil management and to encourage the use of organic
matters and to protect the health of soil
x.
To help the Additional Director or the Head of the section to preserve all records,
update them and prepare reports on them.
i.
To play a role in making work plans, management and monitoring related to quality
seed, fuel or electricity for irrigation, etc.
ii.
To take measures to ensure supply of seeds according to the demand of the district
iii. To supervise production of quality seeds
iv.
To assess the compatibility of imported seeds and the seeds produced in the country
v.
To coordinate among those who produce seeds, control quality and work in marketing
vi. To play a role in the implementation of the government’s seed policy and seed laws in
the field level
vii. To collect information, analyse and make reports on the use of irrigation tools and
irrigated lands
viii. To communicate and coordinate among the irrigation management institutions.
i.
To help the Deputy Director (seeds and Inputs) in input related work
ii.
To transfer information about seeds, fertilizers and fertilizer related products
(including organic fertilizer), irrigation and soil management to field levels.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iii.
To collect necessary information, to preserve them through processing for future use
and to send it to the Additional Director for taking necessary steps
iv.
To do all necessary tasks for soil management, to encourage the use of compost or
organic matters and to take steps for the protection of the health of soil
v.
To assist in the preservation of all records of the section and to keep them updated.
i.
To take charge as the head of the agricultural region
ii.
To plan, evaluate and analyse all the divisional activities of the region
iii. To coordinate among the agricultural research institutes, all public or semigovernment and non-government institutions in regional areas
iv.
To take steps to solve the problems marked by the officers of district levels and to help
the district level officers through technical suggestions
v.
To investigate the quantity and quality of extension services in the field level through
technical audit
vi. To take effective measures in case of transfers, postings, administrative and financial
matters within the region
vii. To investigate all activities of the officers and employees under the region.
i.
To help the Additional Director in developmental, financial and administrative
activities of the region
ii.
To maintain the updated record of human resources of the agricultural extension
department
iii.
To help to protect the updated record of the movable and immovable assets of the region
iv.
To help in making policies and implementing the measures to enhance the skill and to
develop other activities of the human resource of the region
v.
To act as the member-secretary of the activities regarding the promotion of 3rd class
and 4th class employees
vi. To scrutinize the pension records of the 3rd class and 4th class employees and
presenting it before the Additional Director
vii. To prepare the Annual Confidential Record (ACR) of the officers and employees of the
Additional Director’s office.
i.
To help the Additional Director to make policies and implement activities like
agricultural mechanization, irrigation and drainage
ii.
To supervise the activities of Senior Agricultural Engineers of the district under the region.
Additional Director (Region), Grade-3, Number of Position-14
Deputy Director (Establishment and Development), Grade- 5, Number of
Position-14
Senior Agricultural Engineer, Grade-6, Number of Position-14

iii. To encourage the farm mechanization and to help superiors to make all kinds of
agricultural equipment available
iv.
To help the Additional Director to solve problems and to implement the programmes
in the field level.
i.
To take charge as the head of agricultural activities of the district
ii.
To undertake the duties of planning, implementation and evaluation of agricultural
activities in the upazilas and blocks as the main field supervising officer of the district
iii. To take care of all the works under District Agricultural Office and ensure the
accountability of their works
iv.
To take effective measures regarding the transfers in the district, postings,
administrative and financial matters by the power given by the government
v.
To take charge of preparing and implementing seasonal crop production plans, in
district levels
vi. To take charge of visiting, evaluating and making report of crop production activities of
the respective district
vii. To assess the annual need of all kinds of agricultural equipment and inputs including
seed, fertilizer, electricity, diesel, pesticide and to make policies to supply these to the
farmers at the value fixed by the government
viii. To encourage the mechanization of agriculture and to play a role in making agricultural
equipment available
ix.
To act as the head of the district’s plan and implementation of agricultural rehabilitation
programme as a part of natural disaster management
x.
To act as the coordinator of district level activities regarding the agricultural research,
extension and input supply management
xi.
To act as the link between district level input and credit management agencies
xii. To act as the connector of flow of technological information from national levels to
local levels
xiii. To take charge to find out the problems at the field level and to solve them by sending
them to related national institutions
xiv. To act as the drawing-disbursing officer according to the laws and to keep record of it
xv. To investigate implementation of the project or programme activity
xvi. To plan and take measures for training to develop the skill of departmental officials or
employees
xvii.To investigate into the quality of extension services in the field level through technical
audit or surveys.
i.
To assess the training needs of officers or employees in the district level, to make
annual training activity plans of the district and to help implement proper
management of all these
ii.
To approve upazila training modules, training materials etc. after verification.
Deputy Director (District), Grade-5, Number of Position-64
District Training Officer, Grade-5, Number of Position-64
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iii. To take measures to train officers or employees in different levels of the district
iv.
To take measures in compiling the impact points of fortnightly trainings of SAAOs of
the district
v.
To provide instructions to upazilas about management of farmers’ trainings on timely
and locally appropriate crop production technologies and monitoring them
vi. To take charge in case of collecting and supplying training materials
vii. To coordinate among different training programmes of the district, to help the Deputy
Director to sanction nomination for the officers or employees for training.
i.
To help the Deputy Director for making and implementing the seasonal crop
production plans
ii.
To play the role of a technical person in case of spreading modern technologies for crop
production
iii. To take charge in case of collecting and preserving all information about crop
cultivation, to develop the cropping system and to make agricultural calendars
iv.
To play a role in assessing the demand for seeds, fertilizer and different inputs of the district
and for getting approval from the district’s Fertilizer and Seed Monitoring Committee
v.
To make plans of all kinds of demonstration, to instruct other Agricultural Officers for
implementing them, preserving records, to make strategic plans of activity for
implementing field days and to take measures to send reports
vi. To help in producing and preserving improved seeds at the farmers’ levels
vii. To help the Deputy Director to mechanize agriculture and to manage inputs
viii. To identify the problems of producing crops at the field level and to take steps to solve
them
ix. To help implement and evaluate the steps taken in the national level
x.
To conduct surveys on different agricultural issues and to inform superior authorities
about their outcome from time to time.
i.
To help regarding plant protection programmes for planning and implementing crop
production
ii.
To implement several activities under plant protection programmes followed by public
policies and laws and to act as the authority of pesticide licensing and lead the
vigilance team to verify the standard of pesticides for marketing
iii. To lead and take steps for the programmes of the vigilant survey (surveillance) related
to the pests of the field crop and to manage the programme
iv.
To take effective steps for encouraging integrated pest management of field crops and
horticultural crops
v.
To play a role in the implementation process of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for
producing safe food under safe food laws
vi. To assist the Deputy Director in making and implementing departmental plans.
Additional Deputy Director (Crop), Grade-6, Number of Position-64
Additional Deputy Director (PP), Grade-6, Number of Position-64

Additional Deputy Director ( Horticulture), Grade-6, Number of Position-64
Agricultural Engineer, Grade-9, Number of Position-64
Upazila Agricultural Officer, Grade-6, Number of Position-487
i.
To help in planning and implementing the production of horticultural crops
ii.
To execute realistic activities to spread newly invented varieties for horticultural crop
production
iii. To identify the obstacles in producing horticultural crops and to take necessary steps
to extend them
iv.
To implement, evaluate and analyse the activities taken in national levels
v.
To visit nurseries, to register them and to train the owners
vi. To encourage all farmers to plant trees (fruit & forest trees) in the light of climate
change situation.
i.
To display modern agricultural equipment to the farmers in the district level under the
Deputy Director, to provide training for skilled operators and mechanics in the field
level, to provide extension services about the use and maintenance of irrigation
equipment in the field level
ii.
Providing assistance in the development and implementation of training and
demonstration in the upazilas for the development of the irrigation system and the
development of structures
iii. To survey national minor irrigation and agricultural equipment, to collect information
on rainfalls and underground water as well as above ground water and to take
initiatives to protect these
iv.
To encourage the mechanization of agriculture and to play a role in making agricultural
equipment easily available
v.
To collect updated information about agricultural equipment in district and upazila
levels, to take initiatives to repair usable equipment, and to make a list of unrepairable
equipment for taking further initiatives by informing superior authorities
vi. To help in preparing budgets for equipment to be repaired in the department
vii. To investigate into the activities of upazila via assistant agricultural engineer.
i.
To take measures in developing programmes and implementation of local agricultural
development through Upazila councils
ii.
To prioritize and perform the local activities and oversee high value crop production
and crop diversification including development of commercial agriculture
iii. To coordinate the activities regarding supply, availability and distribution of fertilizer,
seed and other agricultural equipment
iv.
To coordinate and undertake the inter-union and sub-district’s minor irrigation
projects and to excavate and re-excavate canals for irrigation and drainage to ensure
proper use of the water above ground or surface water
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
To take measures to extend all kinds of technologies related to crop production
vi. To take initiatives to arrange agricultural fairs, new crops, new technology
advancements for increasing enthusiasm of the farmers to adopt appropriate
agricultural technologies
vii. To take timely measures to use information and communication technologies
(digitization or digitalisation) and to expand it
viii. To take local initiatives to face harmful effects in agriculture caused by global climate
change and to coordinate with involved divisions or organisations
ix.
Bringing dynamism in the farmer service centres and to take necessary steps to
maintain it
x.
To do the duties for implementing the projects and programme activities under the
Agricultural Extension Department
xi.
To take initiatives and to take effective steps for launching e-agriculture, and providing
orientation to AAOs, AEOs, SAAOs and others
xii. To take the responsibility of coordinating the farmers and researchers and others to
circulate or disseminate modern and sustainable agricultural technologies in upazila
levels
xiii. To supervise the work of subordinates, to take immediate actions about the problems
of the farmers and to inform the district authority immediately
xiv. To perform the other tasks given by the government, upazila council or other proper
authorities
xv. To act as the upazila fertilizer inspector.
i.
To assess the training needs of farmers in the local level and to take measures in
developing training modules
ii.
To help Upazila Agricultural Officer to take effective measures by making the reports of
visiting all activities of the field level
iii.
To perform the duties specified in the gazette published by the government along with
supervising and monitoring activities related to fertilizer, seeds, pesticides etc. of
upazilas
iv.
To help Upazila Agricultural Officer to collect local agricultural information, preserve
them and to make a data bank
v.
To help Upazila Agricultural Officer to coordinate between different intradepartmental activities of the sub-district
vi.
To perform the other tasks given by the government, upazila- council or other proper
authorities
vii. To take charge of close monitoring of the suggestion service activities done through
providing written “Agricultural Prescription” including management of Plant Clinics
based on blocks, union councils or upazila parishads
viii. To act as the upazila fertilizer inspector
ix.
To perform other tasks given by Upazila Agricultural Officer.
Additional Agricultural Officer, Grade-6, Number of Position-487

Agricultural Extension Officer, Grade-9, Number of Position- 495
Metropolitan Agricultural Officer, Grade-6, Number of Position-24
i.
To play a role in planning and implementing the seasonal production of crops
ii.
To make extension programme plans in the light of farmers’ information needs
iii. To play an effective role for enhancing technical skill of SAAOs by using e-agriculture
for helping farmers
iv.
To make a demand list of different inputs of upazilas by SAAO through agricultural surveys
v.
To oversee the training activities of SAAO
vi. To play a vital role in preserving the records of evaluation, supervision, implementation,
policy making, farmers’ training, field days related to projects and beyond
vii. To help the Upazila Agricultural Officers in case of crop production, plan preservation,
irrigation management, equipment availability, etc.
viii. To direct AAEO, SAPPO, SAAO for different kinds of works and to supervise them for
implementation
ix. To work as the supervising officer for approval of SAAO’s fortnightly work programmes
and to ensure its implementation
x.
To solve the problems in block levels, in case of failure to inform the collaborating
organisation or district specialist about it and to provide final suggestions about
recommending solutions to the problems
xi. To train and suggest SAAOs to make crop diversification, to supply inputs and loan and
to transfer technologies among farmers etc.
xii. To play a role in planning and implementing extension activities in sub-district levels
such as agricultural fairs, technology fairs, motivational tours , farmers' training etc.
xiii. To help superior officers in planning and implementing crop production in the field
level of agricultural department
xiv. To play the role of sub-district fertilizer and pesticide auditors
xv. To perform the other tasks given by the government, upazila council or other proper
authorities.
i.
To perform the local activities on the priority basis for developing commercial
agriculture including high value crop production and crop diversification
ii.
To take steps to collect, preserve and distribute local agricultural information and to
make a data bank
iii. To coordinate the supply, availability and distribution of fertilizers, seeds, other inputs
and modern agricultural equipment including irrigation
iv.
To take steps for implementing the plans of local landscaping, kitchen gardening,
interior gardening and roof top gardening.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
To take initiatives to plan and train for the extension of urban horticulture in urban areas
vi. To take steps for rat control programmes and the management of tree plantation and
to help make compost from garbage
vii. To supervise subordinate extension employees.
i.
To collect information of daily activities in the field, preparing reports and presenting
them to the next officer
ii.
To help the farmers of sub-district levels in every way
iii. To visit and supervise fields
iv.
To help AAO or AEOs in making a demand list related to crop production
v.
To help AAO or AEOs in plant protection activities
vi. To help Upazila Agricultural Officer to plan, implement and evaluate the agricultural
extension programme
vii. To be dutiful to other extensional activities including training SAAOs and farmers
viii. To help and suggest the accountable officer in collecting and protecting departmental
asset’s information.
i.
To help to control the pests in the field
ii.
To collect all information on pesticides
iii. To take initiatives for pest management of field crops and horticultural crops in the
light of IPM and ICM
iv.
To prepare a weekly report on pest surveillance and forecasting and operate a squad
for pest management in severe cases
v.
To collect the sample of counterfeit pesticides, to visit the dealers’ pesticide shops for
collecting information to help the Agricultural Extension Officer
vi. To preserve all the records regarding pest management
vii. To help the Agricultural Extension Officers to undertake different programmes on
plant protection
viii. To take effective steps to establish and maintain an insect and disease museum at
upazila levels
ix. To collect block reports regarding damage of insects and diseases and to take
initiatives to send it to superior authorities after making report
x.
To assist operating farmers’ field schools of IPM, ICM, climate change and other
programmes
xi. To implement different types of motivating programmes including pest management
of crops and rat control campaigns.
Assistant Agricultural Extension Officer, Grade-10, Number of Position-487
Sub-assistant Plant Protection Officer, Grade-11, Number of Position-509

xii. To engage PPM in the protection of plants, to make sprayers ready for controlling pests
and to help the farmers about pest management
xiii. To visit the shops of the pesticide dealers and to suggest the dealers for keeping
pesticides according to that locality’s need and to inform authorities about it
xiv. To collect and protect information of the list of pesticide dealers and to visit shops
according to the notice of the authority for providing new licenses and renewal of licenses
xv. To perform all the duties given to any related committee of plant protection.
i.
To help in directing implementation of field programmes of the Department of
Agricultural Extension at the farmers’ levels
ii.
To help farmers in every way by being present in the field all the time
iii. To inform authorities after marking the problems of the farmers
iv.
To take realistic steps in solving farmers’ problems regarding their fields and
horticultural crops
v.
To provide agricultural extension services to all types of farmers
vi. To find out the problems of the farmers by staying with them and to provide possible
solutions
vii. To send the seasonal production planning proposal to made on the basis of farmers’
information-needs upazila officer and to help him in planning workshops and for
planning suitable extension activities or programmes
viii. To make plans of fortnightly visit in accordance with seasonal activity plans and to
implement it with the help of the supervising officer’s approval, to suggest the farmers
about the unsolvable problems by discussing it in upazila- trainings or reporting days
ix. To operate different planned extension programmes such as: demonstration,
motivational trainings, motivational meetings, group discussions, establishing small
trial plots through partnerships and conducting field days on the basis of local demands
x.
To conduct surveys on natural calamities or other issues for collecting information
xi. To collect all agriculture related information of the block and preserve in the diary
those information about natural resources, population, area of cultivatable land,
traditional cropping pattern, demand of different inputs, number of modern
agricultural technology users and their successes, problems or obstacles, marketing
process of produced crops, the advantages and disadvantages of getting loans, storage
of agricultural commodities etc.
xii. To provide need based motivational trainings under DAE’s projects and beyond
xiii. To work in the management of integrated farms by helping the farmers get
information and help of other organizations
xiv. To perform the sample crop cuttings of food crops and other crops to measure the
total production and to send it to upazilas
xv. To inform the Upazila Agricultural Officer and pesticide inspectors about the daily
condition and needs of seed, fertilizer, diesel, electricity and other inputs of the block.
Sub-assistant Agricultural Officer, Grade-11, Number of Position-14092
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

xvi. To arrange meetings as the member-secretary of union’s agricultural committees and
to send the reports to the president of Upazila Agricultural Committee
xvii.To take necessary steps in the invention process and to increase the use of new
varieties of crops including mushroom and others by giving suggestions to the farmers
and by providing motivational trainings
xviii.To play a role in fulfilling the information demands or needs of the farmers via
e-agriculture
i.
To control the quality of pesticide by involving regional, district, upazila and
metropolitan officers
ii.
To act as the authority of pesticide registration and licensing according to The Pesticide
Ordinance, 1971 (2009 amendment), The Pesticide Rules 1985 (2010 amendment)
and other laws
iii. To implement the recommendations of Pesticide Technical Advisor Committees as the
member-secretary of the committee
iv.
To register new pesticides as the President of Pesticide Technical Advisor SubCommittee and to prepare minutes or loges and recommendation for Pesticide
Technical Advisor Committee
v.
To implement the pest surveillance and forecasting
vi. To extend environment friendly IPM in the field level
vii. To prepare and implement national rat control programmes or campaigns
viii. To supervise and monitor the production systems and sales of environment-friendly
and good quality pesticides
ix. To prepare a project concept paper and implement, monitor and evaluate projects
x.
To keep all programmes of Plant Protection wing active.
i.
To help protect crops and make pesticide administration and quality control activities
effective
ii.
To act as the member- secretary of pesticide technical advisory sub-committee
iii. To make work plans for pesticide technical advisory committee
iv.
To help in registering pesticides and provide licenses
v.
To visit pesticide factories and to monitor the production processes
vi. To visit and evaluate the revenues received from pesticide registration and different
licenses
vii. To arrange trainings, seminars and workshops for increasing consciousness about
using safe pesticides
viii. To help the Director to operate the plant protection wing.
Plant Protection Wing
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Pesticide Administration and Quality Control), Grade-3,
Number of Position-1

Additional Director (Pest Management, Surveillance and Forecasting),
Grade-3, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Pesticide Administration), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
i.
To ensure pest surveillance surveys related to crops, forecasts and warnings
ii.
To determine the presence of insects in crops via surveillance surveys in the field level
and to transfer and extend technologies according to it
iii. To implement the national rat control campaign or programme
iv.
To maintain communication with research institutions and to collect developed
technologies and extend them for protecting crops
v.
To arrange training, seminars and workshops on vigilant surveys and IPM
vi. To implement and monitor IPM programmes
vii. To act upon the news and information published or telecasted via media about crop
protection.
i.
To control the production, distribution and use of pesticide according to pesticide rules
ii.
To notify the involved to prepare agenda and minutes of Sub-PITAC and PITAC
iii. To visit the distributing centres and pesticide factories according to the superior
authority’s order
iv.
To keep the books related to pesticide registration, licensing and renewal
v.
To notify the involved regarding activities of pesticide registration, licensing, etc.
vi. To build proper pesticide administration by communicating with the officials of district
and upazila levels
i.
To analyse samples and make reports for ensuring the quality of pesticide or accurateness
ii.
To examine the maximum residual (MRL) level of pesticide
iii.
To analyse the samples and to make reports for registering and renewing and to direct
Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control) and chemists to prepare agenda
for meetings of sub-PITAC and PITAC committees according to the laboratory report
iv.
To direct Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control) and chemists to take
samples of pesticide from fields and institutions to analyse and make reports
v.
To take measures to fix standard dose of application and safe usage of pesticide
vi. To distribute the charge to the Additional Deputy Directors (Pesticide Quality Control) as
laboratory in charge on rotation
vii. To help in visiting pesticide factories, collecting samples and in quality control activities
by the direction of the Director
viii. To provide technical assistance while visiting the establishment of new pesticide or
factories.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Deputy Director (Integrated Pest Management), Grade-5, Number of
position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Administration), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
i.
To take steps in preparing and implementing programmes of integrated Pest Management
ii.
To take steps after supervising, monitoring and evaluating the programmes of field levels
iii. To provide proper technical suggestions and trainings to the involved ones for the
implementation of IPM
iv.
To help implement IPM through maintaining continuous communication with the
involved projects
v.
To take measures to conduct training on IPM
vi. To prepare booklets, leaflets and video presentations consisting of IPM information
vii. To continue the programmes of IPM by maintaining communication with the officers
of district and upazila levels
i.
To assist the process of registration and licensing of pesticide
ii.
To provide feedback after following the process of renewing registration and licenses
of all kinds
iii. To visit the factory and distribution centres of pesticide following the order of superior
authorities and to help the proper distribution process of pesticide
iv.
To assist the involved ones to make agenda for PTAC and sub-PTAC
v.
To provide opinion on the injunctions about the changing of country of the origin
vi. To ensure product inclusion.
i.
To prepare reports after sample analyses and examining the application letter for the
registration as well as renewal of pesticide and to help the Deputy Director (Pesticide
Quality Control) for making agenda of the Sub-Pesticide Technical Advisory
Committee (Sub-PTAC) according to the laboratory report
ii.
To prepare report of the maximum residual level (MRL) after examining the sample of
reported crops and analysing the sample of pesticide received from the organization
and the field according to the direction of Deputy Director (Pesticide Quality Control)
iii. To provide technical support to the chemists to find out the maximum residual level
(MRL) of the pesticide of crops and to analyse pesticide, providing analytic reports for
determining the exact needed amount of pesticide or the quality of pesticide
iv.
To provide technical support to approve the label of pesticide, safe use of pesticide and
to determine exact dose of use.

v.
To ascertain the demand of chemicals and equipment of the chemistry lab with the
suggestion of superior authorities and to act as the laboratory in-charge
vi. To assist by visiting the factory of pesticide and collecting samples with the notice of
superior authorities for helping to control the quality
vii. To supervise destroying pesticide materials and draining pesticide factory waste and
to provide necessary instructions and suggestions.
i.
To supervise the surveillance activities or vigilant surveys in the field
ii.
To collect data about crop diseases and insects in the field level and to send cautionary
messages in advance after analysing the data
iii. To help send forecasting messages about pest condition
iv.
To monitor the condition of the field and to inform involved ones including the
Additional Deputy Director (Surveillance and Forecasting)
v.
To assist training the involved officers of field level in the light of vigilant surveys.
i.
To help implementing the field level programmes of IPM, training, data collecting and
taking steps after analyses
ii.
To assist the involved in implementing the field level programmes of IPM and
monitoring the programmes
iii. To prepare a bulletin on IPM related technologies
iv.
To maintain communication with IPM related projects for IPM implementation
v.
To help arrange trainings on IPM.
i.
To prepare all the processes of the record of registration and licensing of pesticides
ii.
To assist by visiting and monitoring the factory and distribution centres with the notice
of superior authorities for helping to keep the distribution process sound
iii. To help superior authorities to implement pesticide laws and ordinance
iv.
To assist making agenda for PTAC and Sub-PTAC.
Additional Deputy Director (Surveillance and Forecasting), Grade-6, Number
of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Integrated Pest Management), Grade-6, Number
of Position-1
Pesticide Regulation Officer, Grade-9, Number of Position-2
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Plant Quarantine Wing
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Import, Export and Laboratory), Grade-3, Number of
Position-1
Deputy Director (Import), Grade- 5, Number of Position-1
i.
To play a role in controlling plant health in accordance with international regulations in
the programmes of import and export of plants and plant related products
ii.
To take charge of National Plant Protection Organisation (NPPO) according to the
International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)
iii. To add new laws and policies to plan quarantine programmes and to enact
quarantine laws
iv.
To supervise the administrative and financial management of all quarantine centres
including the headquarter
v.
To supervise quarantine activities in all the entrances of the country
vi. To issue import permission (IP), phytosanitary certificate (PC), special clearance or
release order (SRO) and anchorage permit
vii. To coordinate, follow and operate programmes related to plant biodiversity and to
follow and implement such international deals, protocol, convention, etc. which are
signed by or sided with Bangladesh about the protection of plant’s health.
viii. To maintain communication with research institutions and other institutions about
plant health protection for national interest.
i.
To supervise export-import activities according to import policies, export policies and
international injunctions
ii.
To help issuing import permissions (IP), phytosanitary certificates (PC) and anchorage
permits
iii. To arrange workshops, seminars, and meetings about export-import and quarantine
iv.
To visit plant quarantine centres, to take measures to develop quality according in the area
v.
To find out the solutions of the possible problems by communicating with officers
vi. To examine exportable plants and related products and to disinfect them if needed
vii. To take extensive management measures to examine imported and exportable plants
and plant products
viii. To help the Director in administrative and official work
ix. To operate and monitor quarantine laboratory.
i.
To take necessary steps to issue import permit (IP) letters

ii.
To verify the papers of imported plant and plant products and to take proper measures
to collect samples
iii. To help issuing Anchorage Permits
iv.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the imported products and if needed, take
steps to treat or to seize the products
v.
To visit plant quarantine centres and to monitor export-import programmes
vi. To help superior authorities to identify and restrain foreign plant diseases
vii. To finalize weekly and monthly report about imported plants and plant products and
send it to the superior authority
viii. To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that
diseases do not enter and spread inside the country
ix. To command how, where and in which way the imported products will be purified and
to monitor its implementation
x.
To negotiate the problems between inspector and importer and to take measures to
solve the problems of plant quarantine activity
xi. To visit the quarantine centres for proper importation of plants and plant products and
to coordinate among all other agencies of the port.
i.
To operate plant quarantine programmes for keeping the export procedures strong
ii.
To verify the papers of exportable plants and plant products and to take proper
measures to collect samples
iii. To operate monitoring programmes and field investigations before exporting plants
and plant products
iv.
To monitor import-export programmes and to visit plant quarantine centres
v.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the exportable products and if needed to take
steps to examine and purify
vi. To ensure that the exportable consignment is from the locality which is pest free or
little pest-infected
vii. To issue Phytosanitary Certificates (PC)
viii. To decide and operate quarantine programmes that will be used in exportable plant
products
ix. To negotiate the problems raised in between inspector and exporters and to solve the
problems of plant quarantine activities
x.
To visit the quarantine centres for proper exportation of plants and plant products and
to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
xi. To finalize the weekly or monthly reports and send it to the superior authority.
Deputy Director (Export), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Deputy Director (Quarantine Centre), Grade-5, Number of Position-12
Additional Deputy Director (Export), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
i.
To verify the papers of importable or exportable plants and plant products and to take
proper measures to collect samples
ii.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the imported products and, if needed, take
steps to purify or to seize the products
iii. To help in issuing Phytosanitary Certificates (PC)
iv.
To help superior authorities to identify and restrain foreign plant diseases
v.
To finalize weekly or monthly reports and to send them to the superior authority
vi. To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that
diseases do not enter and spread inside the country
vii. To command how, where and in which way the imported or exportable products will
be purified and to monitor its implementation
viii. To negotiate the problem between visitors and importers or exporters and to take
measures to solve the problems of plant quarantine activities
ix. To visit the quarantine centres for proper importation or exportation of plants and
plant products and to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
x.
To take charge of all kinds of work of the laboratory under jurisdiction
xi. To provide financial power and office management.
i.
To verify the papers of exportable plants and plant products and to take proper
measures to collect samples
ii.
To operate monitoring programmes and field investigations before exporting plants
and plant like products
iii. To monitor import-export programmes and to visit plant quarantine centres
iv.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the exportable products and, if needed, to take
steps to examine and treat them
v.
To issue Phytosanitary Certificates (PC)
vi. To visit pre-export field tests and activities
vii. To ensure whether the exportable consignment is from the locality which it is pest free
or slightly pest-infected
viii. To decide and operate different kinds of quarantine programmes which will be used in
exportable plant products
ix. To visit the quarantine centres for proper exportation of plants and plant products and
to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
x.
To help operating PRA programmes and to keep data related to it
xi. To finalize weekly or monthly reports and to send them to the superior authority.

Additional Deputy Director (Import), Grade-6, Number of Position-2
Additional Deputy Director (Quarantine Rules, Policy and Laboratory),
Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Plant Quarantine Centre), Grade-6, Number of
Position-8
i.
To take measures in collecting data and to verify the documents of imported plant and
plant products
ii.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the exportable products and, if needed, to take
steps to purify them
iii. To do pre-import inspection and post-quarantine field inspection
iv.
To visit plant quarantine centres and to monitor export-import programmes
v.
To help superior authorities to identify and restrain foreign plant diseases
vi. To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that pest
and diseases do not enter and spread inside the country
vii. To command how, where and in which way the imported products will be purified and
to monitor its implementation
viii. To visit the quarantine centre for proper importation of plants and plant products and
to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
ix. To help operating PRA programmes and to keep data related to it
x.
To finalize weekly and monthly reports on imported plants and plant products and
send it to the superior authority.
i.
To operate all kinds of lab activities including the treatment and laboratory test of
imported as well as exportable plants and plant products
ii.
To manage, develop, and visit the laboratories of plant quarantine centres and to
undertake development programmes for the human resources of the laboratory
iii. To take steps in detecting new pest and diseases
iv.
To notify others about newly received data according to IPPC and ISPM’s guidelines
v.
To help operating PRA programmes and to maintain data related to it
vi. To coordinate between headquarters and other laboratories of plant quarantine centre.
i.
To verify the papers of imported or exportable plants and plant products and to take
proper measures to collect samples
ii.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the exportable products and, if needed, to take
steps to purify them
iii. To help issue Phytosanitary Certificate (PC).
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iv.
To help superior authorities to identify and restrain foreign plant diseases
v.
To finalize weekly or monthly reports and send them to the superior authority
vi. To visit seized imported plants and plant like products and to take measures so that
diseases do not enter and spread inside the country
vii. To command how, where and in which way the imported or exportable products will
be purified and to monitor its implementation
viii. To negotiate the problems raised in between visitors and importers or exporters and to
take measures to solve the problems of plant quarantine activities
ix. To visit the quarantine centre for proper importation or exportation of plants and plant
products and to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
x.
To take charge of all kinds of work of the laboratory under jurisdiction
xi. To provide financial power and office management.
i.
To perform all lab related activities and send reports to the superior authority
ii.
To identify new insects and notify the involved authority
iii. To visit the field and examine the exportable products before exporting
iv.
To ensure that the exported consignment is from a pest free locality
v.
To inspect post-quarantine fields and related activities
vi. To help superior authorities to finalize weekly and monthly reports.
i.
To perform all kinds of lab activity including the lab test and treatment of imported as
well as exportable products and send reports to the superior authority
ii.
To identify new pest and notify the involved authority
iii. To visit the field and examine the exportable products before exporting
iv.
To ensure that the exported consignment is from a pest free locality
v.
To inspect post-quarantine fields and related activities
vi. To help superior authorities to finalize weekly and monthly report.
i.
To identify diseases of exportable plants and plant products and to inform the authority.
Quarantine Entomologist (Rules & Policy and Laboratory), Grade-9, Number
of Position-1
Quarantine Pathologist (Rules & Policy and Laboratory), Grade-9, Number of
Position-1
Quarantine Pathologist (Export), Grade-9, Number of Position-1

ii.
To collect samples of causal microorganism to check if there is any disease infection in
exportable plants and plant products
iii. To collect samples of exportable plants and plant products if needed
iv.
To visit the field and examine the products before exporting and to operate according
to the suggestion of superior authorities
v.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection of the exportable plants and plant products and, if
needed, help superior officers, of the same section to take steps to purify and treat them
vi. To ensure that the exported consignment is from a pest free locality
vii. To decide and operate different kinds of quarantine programmes which will be used in
different exportable plant products and to help superior officers of the same section to
take necessary steps
viii. To prepare weekly and monthly reports and send it to the superior authority.
i.
To identify new insects in exportable plants and plant products and to inform the
involved authority
ii.
To send the samples of exportable plants and plant products to the laboratory to
preserve if any insect is found in them
iii. To collect samples of exportable plants and plant products if needed
iv.
To visit the field and examine the products before exporting and to operate according
to the suggestion of the superior authority
v.
To ensure that the exported consignment is from a pest free locality
vi. To decide and operate different kinds of quarantine programmes which will be used in
different exportable plant products and to help superior officers of the same section to
take necessary steps
vii. To prepare weekly and monthly reports and send it to the superior authority.
i.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection to identify the presence of infection in imported
plants and plant products and to notify involved ones
ii.
To send samples of imported plants and plant- products to check for infection and the
reason for infection
iii. To collect samples of imported plants and plant products if needed
iv.
To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that
diseases do not enter and spread inside the country.
Quarantine Entomologist (Export), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
Quarantine Pathologist (Import), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
To command how, where and in which way the imported or exportable products will
be purified or treated and to monitor its implementation
vi. To inform important incidents to the superior authority immediately
vii. To prepare weekly and monthly reports and send it to the superior authority.
i.
To conduct phytosanitary inspection to identify the presence of infection in imported
plants and plant products and to notify involved ones or concerned all
ii.
To send sample of imported plant and plant product if the presence of insects is
identified to find out the reason
iii. To collect samples of imported plants and plant products if needed
iv.
To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that pest do
not enter and spread inside the country
v.
To command how, where and in which way the imported or exportable products will
be treated and to monitor its implementation
vi. To notify important incidents to the superior authority immediately
vii. To prepare weekly and monthly report and send it to the superior authority.
i.
To ensure that there is no pest infection in imported and exportable products by
laboratory tests
ii.
To help the Deputy Director to perform of all kinds of work of the laboratory under
jurisdiction
iii. To inspect post-quarantine fields and related programmes
iv.
To undertake the activities regarding the entrance and verification of foreign buses,
trucks, airplanes, ships etc. that are accessible to the country
v.
To take part in controlling and eradicating or eliminating foreign plant diseases
vi. To find out banned plant products and the entrance of any export or import related
cargo and to take proper steps
vii. To inform superior authorities about any important matter related to quarantine
viii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly report.
i.
To ensure that there is no pest infection in imported and exportable products by
laboratory tests.
Quarantine Entomologist (Import), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
Quarantine Pathologist (Quarantine Centre - Category A), Grade-9, Number
of Position-8
Quarantine Pathologist (Quarantine Centre - Category B), Grade-9, Number
of Position-12

ii.
To help the Additional Deputy Director to perform of all kinds of work of the laboratory
under his jurisdiction
iii. To inspect post-quarantine fields and related programmes
iv.
To examine the activities of the entrance of foreign buses, trucks, airplanes, ships etc.
that are accessible to the country
v.
To take part in controlling and uprooting or eliminating foreign plant diseases
vi. To find out banned plant products and the entrance of any export or import related
cargo and to take proper steps
vii. To inform superior authorities about any important matter related to quarantine
viii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly report.
i.
To verify the documents of imported or exportable plants and plants and to take
proper measures to collect samples
ii.
To conduct Phytosanitary inspection of the imported or exportable product and if
needed to take steps to treat or to seize them
iii. To issue phytosanitary Certificate (PC)
iv.
To help the superior authority to identify and restrain foreign plant diseases
v.
To finalize weekly or monthly reports and to send it to superior authorities.
vi. To visit seized imported plants and plant products and to take measures so that
diseases do not enter and spread inside the country
vii. To command how, where and in which way the imported products will be treated and
to monitor its implementation
viii. To negotiate the problem raised in between visitor and importer or exporter and to
take measures to solve the problems of plant quarantine activities
ix. To visit the concussion centres for proper importation or exportation of plants and
plant like products and to coordinate among all other agencies of the port
x.
To take charge of all kinds of work of the laboratory under jurisdiction
xi. To provide financial power and office management.
i.
To verify the documents of imported or exportable plant and plant products if the
products complies with the requirement of importation
ii.
To check phytosanitary certificate and other documents primarily in case of the
entrance of imported cargo in the country
iii. To collect sample of the products
iv.
To examine the activities of the entrance of foreign buses, trucks, airplanes, ships etc.
that are accessible to the country.
Quarantine Pathologist (Quarantine Centre - Category C), Grade-9, Number of
Position-10
Quarantine Inspector (Quarantine Centre), Grade-10, Number of Position-18
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
To let the cargo in and to find out banned plant products related to export or import
under the direction of superior authorities
vi. To find out and seize banned exportable or importable plants and plant products
under the direction of superior authorities and to inform them
vii. To provide necessary service in case of incoming or outgoing plants and plant products
in airport and land port according to laws
viii. To check port’s incoming or outgoing doubtful passenger’s baggage manually, by X-ray
or sniffer dogs and to provide necessary services
ix. To find out the importable or exportable risky banned plants and plant products that
can be imported or exported
x.
To allow luggage or cargos that meet the demand of inside country
xi. To take part in controlling and eliminating or eradicating foreign plant diseases
xii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly reports.
i.
To inspect products before exporting
ii.
To operate pre-export necessary tests and treatments according to the suggestion of
superior authorities
iii. To help the quarantine pathologists in case of pre-export field test and inspections
iv.
To ensure that the exported consignment is from a pest free locality
v.
To test phytosanitary certificates and other primarily documents for exporter’s cargo
to leave the country under the direction of superior authorities
vi. To examine the activities of the entrance of foreign buses, trucks, airplanes, ships etc.
that are accessible to the country
vii. To find out banned exportable plant products in cargo and to take necessary steps
viii. To find out risky passengers having exportable banned plant and plant products in the
cargo
ix. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly reports.
i.
To verify the document of imported plant and plant products if the product complies
with the requirement of imported country.
ii.
To collect samples
iii.
To verify phytosanitary certificate primarily for imported cargo getting inside the country
iv.
To examine the activities of the entrance of foreign buses, trucks, airplanes, ships etc.
that are accessible to the country
v.
To find out risky passengers carrying exportable banned plant and plant products in
the cargo
vi. To find out banned importable plant products in the cargo and to seize and destroy
them under the direction of superior authority
vii. To allow the luggage or cargos that meet the demand to get inside country.
Quarantine Inspector (Export), Grade-10, Number of Position-2
Quarantine Inspector (Import), Grade- 10, Number of Position-1

viii. To take part in controlling and eliminating foreign plant diseases
ix. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly report.
i.
To collect sample of products
ii.
To verify the documents of imported plant and plant products if the products complies
with the requirements of importation
iii. To find out banned importable or exportable plants and plant products and to seize
and destroy them under the direction of superior authority
iv.
To provide necessary services and interrogate the outgoing passengers carrying
plants and plant products in airports and land ports according to laws
v.
To check port’s outgoing doubtful passenger’s baggage manually, by X-ray or sniffer
dogs and to provide necessary services
vi. To find out the high risky importable or exportable banned plant and plant products
that can be imported or exported
vii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly report.
i.
To help inspect imported and exportable plants and plant products
ii.
To collect sample and to help in laboratory testing
iii. To examine the activities of the entrance of foreign buses, trucks, airplanes, ships etc.
that are accessible to the country
iv.
To supervise the entrance of cargos and to find out banned plant product
v.
To destroy banned importable plants and plant products under the direction of
superior authorities
vi. To allow luggage or cargos that meet the demand to get inside the country
vii. To take part in controlling and uprooting or eradicating foreign plant diseases
viii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly report.
i.
To help in inspecting imported and exportable plants and plant products
ii.
To collect samples and to help laboratory tests under the direction of authorities
iii. To search and provide services to the outgoing passengers carrying plants and plant
products in airport and land port according to laws under the direction of authorities
iv.
To find out the risky importable or exportable banned plants and plant products that
can be imported or exported
v.
To look for banned importable products in the cargo under the direction of superior
authorities.
Sub-assistant Quarantine Officer (Quarantine Centre), Grade-11, Number of
Position-26
Field Assistant (Quarantine Centre), Grade-16, Number of Position-12
Plant Observer, Grade-16, Number of Position-30
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

vi. To destroy banned importable plants and plant products under the direction of
superior authorities
vii. To take part in controlling and eliminating foreign plant diseases
viii. To help superior authorities to prepare weekly and monthly reports.
i.
Granting of administrative approval regarding the yearly production planning,
scheduled programmes and financial issues of horticulture centres
ii.
Providing directions in horticultural crops extension activities
iii. Collecting the modern updated technologies about horticultural crops recommended
by the research institutes and universities and taking initiatives to extend them among
the farmers
iv.
Taking steps to increase the skills of the staffs in the headquarters and horticulture centres
v.
Leading the plan compilations or preparation or implementation and monitoring of the
wing
vi. Adopting activities for the expansion of post-harvest technologies of horticultural crops
vii. Taking initiatives for bringing the pace in the similar activities of different research
institutes by creating an inter-institutional relation between them
viii. Providing support to the Director General in the implementation of running activities
of DAE.
i.
Identification of the horticultural crops production technology extension activities
ii.
Helping the Director in conducting and coordinating the activities regarding transfer of
modern technology of horticultural crops
iii. Taking initiatives in the expansion of production of coconut or plum or betel nuts or
dates along with other palm types of crops, medicinal plants and other fruits which are
on the verge of extinction
iv.
Taking initiatives in creating an inter-organisational relation between horticultural
crops research institutes and the business organizations
v.
Helping the Director in planning the development of manpower, infrastructure and
technology of the horticulture centres and implementing them
vi. Identifying the problems with the production of horticultural crops and keeping the
communications with the universities and research institutes for research based
solutions
vii. Helping the Director in overall planning, implementation and monitoring of the wing.
Horticulture Wing
Director (Horticulture Wing), Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director, Grade -3, Number of Position-1

Deputy Director (Tuber, Vegetable and Spice Crops), Grade-5, Number
of Position-1
Deputy Director (Fruits and Flowers), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Tuber, Vegetable and Spice Crops), Grade-6,
Number of Position-1
i.
Providing assistance to higher authorities in planning and implementation of annual
production of the horticulture centres
ii.
Verifying the utility and taking expansion initiative of foreign varieties of tuber,
vegetables and spice crops
iii. Providing assistance to the higher authorities in planning and technology transfer of
tuber, vegetables and spice crops production
iv.
Providing technical assistance in increase of tuber, vegetables and spice crops
production programmes in the horticulture centres
v.
Identifying the problems with the productions of above mentioned crops and for a
research based solution of the problems, establishing a communication with the
research institutes and universities, collecting the updated technology and providing
assistance to the higher authorities to reach the farmers for extension
vi. Increasing the skills of the staffs in the horticulture centres for the extension of
technologies of tuber, vegetables and spice crops.
i.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities in implementing and preparing the
yearly production plans of the horticulture centres
ii.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities in preparation of plans and transferring
technologies for fruit and flower production
iii. Providing technical assistance to the horticulture centres in order to implement the
production increasing activities of fruits and flowers
iv.
Identifying the problems with the productions of fruits and flowers, for a research
based solution of the problems, establishing a communication with the research
institutes and universities, collecting the updated technology and providing assistance
to the higher authorities to reach the farmers for extension
v.
Verifying the utility and taking extension initiative of foreign variety of fruits and flowers
vi. Increasing the skills of the staffs in the horticulture centres for the extension of
technologies of fruits and flowers.
i.
Planning activities in order to create mass awareness about the nutritive quality of
vegetables, tuber and spice crops and playing role in increasing the skills of people
with the multiple uses of these
ii.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities in the extension of production
technologies of vegetables, mushroom, tuber and spice crops
iii. Providing technical assistance to the horticulture centres in implementing the
arranged programmes for the increase of tuber, vegetables and spice crops.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iv.
Helping the higher authorities by collecting of updated technology recommended by
the research institutes and universities and expanding towards the farmers
v.
Verifying the utility and taking expansion initiative in the extension activities of foreign
vegetables, tuber and spice crops
vi. Increasing the skills of the staffs in the horticulture centres for the extension of
cultivation technologies of tuber, vegetables and spice crops.
i.
Planning activities in order to create mass awareness about the nutritive quality of
fruits and flowers and playing role in increasing the skills of people with the multiple
uses of these
ii.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities in the extension of production
technologies of fruits and flowers
iii. Providing technical assistance to the horticulture centres in implementing the
arranged programmes for the increase of fruits and flower production
iv.
Helping the higher authorities by collecting of updated technologies recommended by
the research institutes and universities and expanding towards the farmers
v.
Verifying the utility and providing assistance in the expansion activities of foreign fruits
and flowers
vi. Increasing the skills of the staffs in the horticulture centres for the extension of
cultivation technologies of fruits and flowers.
i.
Submission for approval of preparation of “Annual Production Plan” in the light of
demands of supervised areas to the Director of Horticulture wing
ii.
Submitting the development report of the activities adopted in the light of annual
production plan to the Director of the Horticulture wing
iii. Taking initiatives to compile and implement the annual production plan through
coordinating the respective offices of DDAE or Upazilla Agricultural Offices and the
horticulture centres of the same area
iv.
Production, implementation of the latest and modern verities of seeds, mushrooms in
the light of production policy and taking initiatives to sell among the common people
v.
Creating mass awareness regarding the nutritive value of horticultural crops and
mushrooms and informing the common people about the multiple uses of these
vi. Providing adequate training to the common people for creating the awareness
regarding the importance of trees in preservation of nature and nutrition
vii. Taking initiatives to collect and install modern usable technology in the nurseries
recommended by the research institutes and university authority
Additional Deputy Director (Fruits and Flowers), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
Deputy Director (Horticulture Centre), Grade-5, Number of Position-28

viii. Verifying the utility and providing assistance in the extension activities of varieties of
foreign fruits and flowers and taking initiatives to implement them
ix. Taking fruitful initiatives to develop the skills of staffs in the horticulture staffs in the
light of their planning
x.
Taking initiatives to establish an inter institution relation
xi. Supervising the accounts of all kinds of cost and income of the centre
xii. Assuring the delivery of all kinds of return report to the higher authorities
xiii. Taking initiatives to increase the earning of revenue
xiv. Assisting in building up private nurseries and inspiring to expand the horticultural crops
xv. Taking initiatives for the preservation of the records of departmental properties of
all kinds.
i.
Planning the research, extension and yearly production of mushroom, acquiring the
approval of the Director and taking steps to implement them
ii.
Taking necessary arrangement for the preservation and documentation of mushroom
germplasm
iii. Inventing modern new technology and varieties of mushroom and its cultivation
technologies and taking initiatives to expand them in field level and their
implementation
iv.
Creating entrepreneurs in the private sector of mushroom for the production and
trading and inventing technologies in collaboration with involved person or institution
and communicating regarding the extension and planning activities together
v.
Coordinating in research and extension of mushroom and providing assistance to the
farmers for the popularization and marketing of mushroom
vi. Making arrangements for the convenience of mushroom seed production and taking
steps for the extension and development of mushroom
vii. Creating a database along with the information collection, preservation and
distribution of mushroom at local level
viii. Providing assistance in the production and extension activities of mushroom sub
centres and monitoring them
i.
Applying for approval to the Director of Horticulture wing after preparation of the
‘Yearly Production Plan in the light of respective areas
ii.
Submitting the progress report of activities taken in the light of yearly production plan
to the Director of Horticulture wing
iii. Preparation of the yearly production policy, taking initiatives for the implementation
through the coordination between the horticulture centres and the DDAE or Upazila
Agriculture Offices of the same area
Deputy Director (Mushroom), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Horticulturist (Horticulture Centre), Grade-9, Number of Position-25
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iv.
Production, extension and taking steps for the distribution of the modern, quality
seeds of mushroom in the light of yearly production policy of the horticulture centres
v.
Creating mass awareness about the nutritive quality of the horticultural crops and
mushroom and informing the common people about the multiple uses of these
vi. Making arrangement for the proper development of the manpower and taking steps
to implement them in the light of policy of the horticulture centres
vii. Supervising all the income and cost accounts of the centres
viii. Assuring the submission of all kinds of return reports of the centres to the higher
authority
ix. Taking steps to increase the revenue income
x.
Providing assistance in establishing private nurseries and helping in the extension of
the horticulture crops
xi. Preservation of the records of all kinds of divisional assets.
i.
Preparing mushroom research, extension and yearly production plans and
implementing them under the order of the Deputy Director
ii.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities for the preservation and proper
documentation of the mushroom germplasm
iii. Inventing technologies for the mushroom seed (spawn), mushroom production,
processing and usage and providing assistance to the interested farmers and
consumes for the extension
iv.
Providing assistance and technical guidance to the assistant mushroom development
officers in the technology invention and extension programmes
v.
Overall supervision of the management task of laboratory, workshop and cultivation
room of mushroom development institute
vi. Advising the interested farmers in mushroom production, use and marketing
vii. Arranging training for the farmers and dormitory supervision.
i.
Providing advice and training to the interested farmers in mushroom production, use
and marketing
ii.
Providing assistance in implementation of the programmes arranged according to the
plan made for mushroom research and extension
iii. Determining the mushroom cultivation area, number of farmers and quantity of
produced mushrooms and supervising at the field level
iv.
Implementing other programmes ordered by the higher authorities.
Mushroom Development Officer, Grade-9, Number of Position-4
Assistant Mushroom Development Officer, Grade-11, Number of Position-4

Nursery Superintendent (Horticulture Centre), Grade-10, Number of
Position-20
Sub-assistant Horticulture Officer, Grade-11, Number of Position-227
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
i.
Prepation of the yearly production plan and implementation through the coordination of
the horticulture centres and the DAE or Upazila Agriculture Office of the respective area
ii.
Applying for approval to the Director of the Horticulture wing for the compilation of
the yearly production plan
iii. Submitting the progress report of the programmes taken under the yearly production
plan of the Horticulture centres to the Director of the Horticulture wing
iv.
Production of developed varieties of seeds and mushroom in the light of Horticulture
centre’s yearly production plan and taking steps to sell them among the common people
v.
Supervising the balance sheets regarding the income and costs of all kinds of the centres.
vi.
Assuring the submission of all kind of return reports to the higher authorities at right time
vii. Taking steps to increase the revenue income
viii. Providing assistance in establishing private nurseries and helping in the extension of
the horticulture and other crops
ix. Preservation of the records of all kinds of departmental assets.
i.
Regular paper work and preservation of all kinds of registers (requisition register of
daily duties, overseer diary, sales register and other types of registers)
ii.
Taking proper initiatives for the implementation of the planning of the centres and
providing assistance to the duty officer
iii. Taking initiatives to collect the necessary items for the running programmes or
activities of the centre and providing assistance to the duty officer
iv.
Conduction of the daily activities of the farm labourer or gardener or labourer fairly
v.
Monitoring the duties of the duty guards for the security of the centre
vi. Providing assistance to the duty officer of the centre in establishing new mother
gardens and assuring the care of the old mother plants
vii. Making proper arrangements for tagging the mother plants
viii. Tagging the produced seedlings or grafts with the proper quality and variety
ix. Making arrangements for the overall beautification and cleanliness of the centre.
i.
Determining the training needs, drawing of the training schedule and implementation
for the officers from all levels and tiers of the Agricultural Extension Institute.
Training Wing
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

ii.
Compilation of training policies or guidelines for the Department of Agricultural Extension
iii. Determining the wing based training needs on the light of the policies of DAE and
preparing a master plan for the training in the country as well as abroad
iv.
Assuring the preparation of syllabus, development and use of the educational items in
all kinds of training
v.
Compilation and implementation of the crop based training programme (yearly) at
different level (small, medium and large)
vi. Assuring the overall administrative, academic and development programmes through
the coordination of the training demand of DAE and other institutions
vii. Taking necessary steps in the monitoring and supervision of training of all undergoing
projects
viii. Preparing a long-term programme for the development of divisional manpower.
i.
Providing assistance to the Director in preparing the database of the Training wing
ii.
Providing assistance to the Director in all kinds of financial management (revenue
budget) of all Agricultural Training Institutes and headquarters
iii. Providing assistance to the Director in determining the demand of wing based training
in the light of the policies of DAE and preparing a master plan for the training in the
country as well as abroad
iv.
Supervision, implementation and evaluation of the master training plan and
development of syllabus if needed and providing assistance to the involved officer,
development and supervision of overall educational plans
v.
Work as a chairman of the technical committee of Agriculture Training Institute’s
development programmes.
i.
Supervising all the academic and development programmes and activities of ATI
ii.
Supervising the activities or programmes regarding the agricultural diploma course
iii. Coordinating Bangladesh Technical Education Board concerning the educational
programmes
iv.
Providing assistance to the Director in all kinds of administrative, management,
preservation and academic fields regarding ATI
v.
Providing assistance in preparing and allotment of the revenue budget of ATIs’
vi. Completing other tasks assigned by the authority.
i.
Providing assistance in conducting all the classes and exams of ATI properly and in time
ii.
Providing assistance in admission of the students within due time
Additional Director (Training), Grade-3, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Diploma Education and Co-ordination), Grade-3,
Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Diploma Education), Grade-5, Number of Position-1

iii. Providing necessary assistance in compiling and implementing the semester plan
according to the course curriculum
iv.
Providing assistance in the administrative issues of the staffs
v.
Providing assistance in preparation of budget compiling and allotment of ATI to the
Additional Director (Diploma Education and Co-ordination).
i.
Providing assistance in coordination of the Agriculture Training Institutes, Project of
DAE and training conducted for the field level farmers
ii.
Providing assistance in preparing the demand based and timely farmer training module
iii. Collecting information and preparing reports regarding the training of the farmers
iv.
Providing assistance in implementing foundation training of the staffs along with all
the departmental training programmes
v.
Preparing various reports regarding training within the country
vi. Providing assistance to the Director in coordinating training of the running projects as
well as other training programmes
vii. Providing assistance to the Director in preparing, implementing and supervising crop
wise yearly training programmes of all categories farmers.
i.
Providing assistance in compilation and development of syllabuses of ATIs’
ii.
Preparing syllabus mixed with age suitable and practical activities
iii. Preparing syllabus mixed with modern cultivation techniques and technical
knowledge
iv.
Assisting the Director to improve the curriculum quality
v.
Maintaining communication with Bangladesh Technical Education Board and other
similar level institutions.
i.
Acting as the secretary of all kinds of selection committees along with the projects
regarding foreign training, educational or study tour, and seminars for all staff, officers
and farmers, higher education of officers abroad
ii.
Preparing and preserving the database on the officers who obtained training within
the country and from abroad
iii. Preparing and submitting reports regarding foreign training to higher authorities
iv.
Creating chances or opportunities for higher education through communicating with
the institutions and universities all over the world.
Deputy Director (Farmer Training), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Curriculum Development and Education), Grade-5, Number
of Position-1
Deputy Director (Higher Education and Foreign Training), Grade-5, Number of
Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Assistant Chief, Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Research Officer, Grade-9, Number of Position-2
Publication Officer, Grade-09, Number of Position-1
Principal, Grade-3, Number of Position-16
i.
Taking necessary steps for development of the libraries of DAE and communicating
with the other libraries as well as the public libraries
ii.
Overall supervision of the library
iii. Providing assistance to higher authorities in making the master plan of all sorts of
training of the training wings
iv.
Preparing different kinds of reports regarding training.
i.
Providing assistance to higher authorities in compiling training programmes
ii.
Compiling various plans regarding the foundation training of officers and capacity
development of the staffs
iii. Coordinating communication with different research institutes for in -service training
iv.
Providing assistance in preparing various reports regarding the training programmes
within the country
v.
Providing assistance in preparing monthly reports of training wings.
i.
To work according to the directions from the authority in the publication of all the
wings and projects of DAE
ii.
Collecting agricultural information based on ICT and internet and taking initiatives to
promote and publish the same
iii. Providing assistance for publication and supervising in the printing of various
publications of wings and Agriculture Training Institutes.
iv.
Preparing various manuals and leaflets regarding the training of staffs and officers
through training wings
v.
Providing assistance to the higher authorities in all sorts of publication.
i.
Planning, implementation and supervision of all the programmes of ATI
ii.
Conducting the academic, administrative and financial activities of ATI
iii. Conducting all academic activities along with students’ admission, curriculum
distribution and examinations
iv.
Communicating and coordinating with Bangladesh Technical Education Board and
other related organisations
v.
Preservation and supervision of all types of assets of the institute
vi. Supervising the resident facility of office staffs, students and taking functional
initiatives for preservation and maintenance of the physical infrastructure

vii. Assuring the maximum usage of the institutes, properties (ponds, fruit orchard and
nurseries) and arable lands
viii. Implementing the academic schedule according to the academic calendar provided by
the Bangladesh Technical Education Board
ix. Supervising the activities of the staffs and officers working in the institute
x.
Keeping constant contact with the Director of the Training Wing for conducting all
activities.
i.
Providing assistance to the Principal in compilation, implementation and supervision
of the policies in the development activities of ATI and advising the subordinates
ii.
Providing assistance to the Principal in academic activities of ATI and other tasks
iii. Providing assistance to the Principal in duty distribution of all the staffs and officers
iv.
Carrying out all the responsibilities of the principal in his absence
v.
Communicating and coordinating with the Bangladesh Technical Education Board and
all other related organisations.
i.
Act as the course coordinator
ii.
Providing assistance to the principal in teaching, academic and administrative tasks
iii. Completing any task assigned by the authority.
i.
Providing assistance in theoretical and practical lessons, class test, preparing question
papers for mid-term examinations, conducting examinations, evaluation of the
answer sheets and for publication of results
ii.
Acting as the warden of the ATI hostels
iii. Providing assistance to the Principal in academic and administrative tasks.
i.
Providing assistance in theoretical and practical lessons, class test, preparing question
papers for mid-term examinations, conducting examinations, evaluation of the
answer sheets and for publication of results
ii.
Conducting the field activities under ATI and coordinating in implementating the same
iii. Completing any task assigned by the authority.
Vice Principal, Grade-5, Number of Position-16
Chief Instructor, Grade-5, Number of Position-80
Senior Instructor, Grade-6, Number of Position-16
Instructor, Grade-9, Number of Position-228
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Sub- assistant Instructor, Grade-11, Number of Position-48
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
i.
Providing assistance in implementing the plans at field levels
ii.
Providing assistance in crop cultivation of the farms of ATI
iii. Providing assistance in pest control of the crops
iv.
Providing assistance to the students in practical lessons
v.
Completing any task assigned by the authority.
i.
Making demand based training plans for Planning, Project Implementation and ICT
Wing and accordingly taking initiatives to develop the skills of all the officers and staffs
ii.
Administering and providing overall support and advice, coordinating with the
subordinate officers and the staffs as a chief of wing
iii. Carrying out the responsibility as a secretary of DAE’s management committee and
organizing meetings based on the consultation with the Director General and
preparing reports
iv.
Providing overall help to the Director General for informing the Bangladesh High
Commissioners or Ambassadors around the world about the promising crops and
exchange of information about the role of agriculture in overall progress of Bangladesh
v.
Helping the Director General in preparing reports on information, opinions in
accordance with the demand of the world regarding agriculture
vi. Collecting information about different activities of DAE along with the updates about
crops from the field level and creating a database for preservation
vii. Collecting all information and data about the crops, analysing them and planning
specific work schedules to enhance the production
viii. Planning, implementation and supervision of all kinds of physical works of the department
ix. Helping in the preservation, repairing and maintenance of all the assets of the
department including transports
x.
Communicating adequately with different donor organisations in order to achieve
project aids
xi. Based on department’s demand planning and acquiring permission for different
projects and taking necessary steps for the implementation and monitoring
xii. Conducting feasibility studies and taking necessary initiatives for getting the
Environmental Impact Assessment Certificate for new projects
xiii. Performing baseline surveys, midterm evaluation, impact assessment of the approved
project and preparing reports and future planning after analysing acquired evaluation
data.
Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing

xiv. Helping the Director General in scheduling programmes and implementing them in
the light of strategic planning and different policies.
i.
Planning principles and strategies of DAE
ii.
Taking proper and timely initiatives in order to ensure the food security of the country
and helping the higher authorities for implementation
iii. Providing overall help and maintaining communication with different projects of the
involved ministry or organisations which are taken or engaged to ensure food security
iv.
Maintaining communication with different organisations according to the demand for
overall development of the country and encouraging the development partners by
putting importance on the activities of DAE in front of them
v.
Submitting the opinion to increase the production of high value or other crops
according to the Agroecological Zone (AEZ)
vi. Informing the higher authority timely, about the overall situation and development of
DAE and the farmers
vii. Preparing the concept paper and outline of the short, middle and long-term projects of
DAE
viii. Future planning after analysing the approved projects’ baseline survey, midterm
evaluation, impact assessment reports and acquired evaluation data
ix. Conducting the works according to the directions of the Director (Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT wing).
i.
Providing helps to the Director of the Planning, Project implementation and ICT wing
in the light of strategic planning and different policies
ii.
Providing opinions on the policy determining surveys and aid proposals
iii. Preparing the opinion of DAE on strategic policy determining acquired from different
organisations and other development activities
iv.
Conducting the works according to the directions of Director of the Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT wing.
i.
To help in planning for the proposed projects considering the overall agricultural
development
ii.
To help in project planning after reviewing the government policy determining
documents
iii. To prepare the idea and outline for short, middle and long-term projects according to
the possibility.
Additional Director (Project Planning), Grade-3, Number of Position-1
Senior Production Economist, Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director (Project Planning), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iv.
To coordinate in preparing of DPP in the light of the Government planning and demand
v.
Providing overall assistance to the Additional Director of project planning.
i.
Crop production planning in the light of the government’s five years’ plan, strategical
plans and agricultural extension policies
ii.
Opinion submission on policy determining surveys and aid proposals
iii. Preparing necessary proposals for foreign aid and cooperation and keeping contact
with other organisations
iv.
One year and five year planning in accordance with the policy and objectives of DAE
v.
Preparing the opinion report of DAE on different projects acquired from different
organisations and other strategic policies
vi. Providing information according to the demand of the National Parliament
vii. Giving opinions on memorandum of understanding, loan agreement, pro-dock and
different appraisal deeds
viii. Submitting reports according to the Ministry’s demand
ix. Preparing reports on the determination of production cost of different crops
x.
Conducting activities by coordinating with the Additional Director of the Project
Planning.
i.
Helping the Deputy Chief (policy planning) in crop production planning in the light of
the government’s five years’ plan, strategical planning and agricultural extension
policies
ii.
Preparing necessary concept paper for the growth in planning crop production
activities which run under DAE
iii. Helping the Deputy Chief (policy planning) in making annual and five years' planning in
accordance with the strategical objectives of DAE
iv.
Helping in putting opinions on policy determining surveys preparing and aid proposals
v.
Collection of information regarding the cost of production and preparing a report on it
vi. Information collection and report compilation for preparing the Economic Survey
Report by the Finance Ministry
vii. Yearly and mid-term budget drawing for development programmes or projects
viii. Preparing reports on the baseline surveys, mid-term evaluation, and to influence
evaluation of the ongoing approved projects and helping the Additional Director in
compiling the future plan basing on the analysed data
ix. Determining the feasibility of projects for the approval of new projects and helping in
acquiring EIA certificates and taking other necessary measures.
Deputy Chief (Policy Planning), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Production Economist (Policy Planning), Garde-6, Number of Position-1

Agricultural Economist (Policy planning), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Assistant Chief (Policy Planning), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Statistical Officer (Policy Planning), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
i.
Helping the Deputy Chief (policy planning) in compiling the crop production planning
in the light of the government’s five years’ plans, strategic plans and national
agricultural extension policies.
ii.
Preparing an outline for the growth increment on the planning of crop production
activities conducted under DAE
iii. Preparing DAE’s yearly development reports
iv.
Preparing the monthly, quarterly and yearly progress reports of DAE’s development
projects
v.
Compiling market based short, mid and long term agricultural production policies by
analysing the domestic and international agriculture markets
vi. Performing the baseline survey, mid-term evaluation, and to influence evaluation of
the ongoing approved projects and reporting to and helping the Additional Director in
compiling the future plan basing on the analysed data.

i.
Completing the task of compiling the yearly and five years’ plans of DAE by the order of
higher authorities
ii.
Helping the Deputy Chief (policy planning) in compiling the need based projects or
programmes of the department
iii. Preparing memorandum of understanding, loan agreement, pro-dock and different
appraisal deeds by the order and direction of Deputy Chief (policy planning)
iv.
Helping the Deputy Chief (policy planning) in preparing and submitting a statement on
the acquired projects from different organisations and other proposals
v.
Helping the higher authorities in collecting and composing reports of monthly and
yearly activities according to the specific format from different organisations
vi. Preparing seasonal crop production survey instruments and reports
vii. Compilation of research based reports from the analyses of the results obtained from
the field level successful projects
viii. Helping the respective authority in collecting information and preparing reports based
on the demand of the Ministry.
i.
Helping the higher authority in preparing a format of projects and programmes
ii.
Helping the higher authority in preparing and submitting IMED report
iii. Helping the higher authority in collection, entry and processing of research based data
regarding agricultural extension
iv.
Collecting information regarding the projects and programmes from the respective
Directors (project or programme) and preparing a report on it.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

v.
Helping in case of preparing the structure of yearly and mid-term budget of DAE
vi. Providing necessary assistance to the higher authorities in making agricultural policies
vii. Preparing clean data for the preservation in the database and helping in the
preparation of the report.
i.
Preparing an outline for the compilation of project based research reports
ii.
Conducting research regularly based on the results of the projects
iii.
Preparing a proposal for the consideration of the next project based on the research data
iv.
Providing overall assistance by the order of higher authority.
i.
Composition, amendments, approval of development projects and programmes and
preparing next activities
ii.
Preparing short, mid and long-term project plan composition through the collection of
information from the wings of DAE
iii. Participating in different seminars regarding project planning and approval
iv.
Helping in progress of development programmes and financial aid activities
v.
Receiving information regarding baseline surveys, mid-term evaluation, evaluation
reports of the approved projects and composing projects after analyses
vi. Conducting activities by coordinating with the Additional Director (Project Planning).
i.
Composition, amendments and processing of projects
ii.
Helping in arranging seminars on ADP discussions about the development projects
and composing worklist
iii. Performing the feasibility study in preparing new projects and processing in acquiring
EIA (Environmental Impact Assessment) certificates from the Department of
Environment Determining the feasibility studies of projects for approval of new projects
and helping in acquiring EIA certificates and taking other necessary measures.
i.
Preparation, amendments and processing of programmes under general budget.
ii.
Participating in the survey of staple crop evaluation and composing reports
iii. Performing the feasibility study of projects for the approval of new projects and
helping for acquiring EIA certificates and taking other necessary measures
Junior Research Officer (Policy Planning), Grade-10, Number of Position-1
Deputy Chief (Project Preparation), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Production Economist (Project Preparation), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Agricultural Economist (Project Preparation), Grade-6, Number of Position-1

iv.
Performing and reporting regarding baseline surveys, mid-term evaluation, to
influence evaluation of the approved projects and helping in composing projects after
analyses
v.
Helping the Deputy Chief (Project Generation) in composing projects and
programmes.
i.
Helping the higher authority in collection, entry and processing of research based data
ii.
Helping the authority in making formats and PCR of the projects
iii. Collecting, composing and compiling information regarding projects under the
command of higher authorities
iv.
Helping in different tasks under the command of higher authorities for the project
planning and implementation.
v.
To collect and compile information to help the higher authorities as per demand of ECNEC.
i.
Providing necessary assistance in balancing with the government policy, strategy and
five years' plans while generating projects
ii.
Providing assistance in compiling the results in PP which are obtained from the Junior
Research Officer (policy planning)
iii. Helping the higher authorities in overall tasks of project compilation.
i.
Helping in project and activity implementation of DAE, monitoring the project and
evaluating and helping the Director of Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing
ii.
Submitting the implementation progress reports to the approved projects of the
ministry, Planning Commission and IMED
iii. Informing the higher authorities about the present and future needs and probable
problems and solution and proposal for taking timely initiatives
iv.
To work with the donor organisations for the strategic policy implementation of DAE
v.
Helping the respective authority for fighting a changing situation in ensuring food
securities
vi. Preparing and submitting the PCR of all the completed projects
vii. Helping in undertaking timely programmes according to the demand of the country.
Statistical Officer (Project Preparation), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
Junior Research Officer (Project Preparation), Grade-10, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Project Implementation and Evaluation), Grade-3,
Number of Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

viii. Helping in overall tasks of the department in accordance with the demand of higher
authorities
ix. Helping the Director regarding administrative and office management activities.
i.
Preparing supervising and monitoring reports of implementation of the running
projects at the field levels
ii.
Composing the evaluation report of the running projects regularly
iii. Conducting the overall evaluation programme of the completed projects
iv.
Composition of baseline surveys, planning, implementation and a proposal before
starting a project
v.
Composing overall evaluation and implementation reports of projects
vi. Helping the Additional Director (Project Implementation and Evaluation)
vii. Providing overall assistance in the department according to the demand of higher
authorities
viii. Providing assistance to the Director and taking steps to increase the skills of manforce
in the wing.
i.
Providing assistance to the Additional Director for implementation of running
programmes and projects
ii.
Taking necessary steps to implement the mid-term and long-term planning of DAE
properly
iii. Advising the higher authority for proper distribution of allotted budget and activity
implementation in the foreign aided or supported projects
iv.
Verification of the allotted costs of the implemented projects and submitting a
written opinion
v.
Verification of the price of the projects set by the DAE and submitting a written opinion
vi. According to the objectives of the project, need based baseline survey, preparing the
instruments for impact assessment and determining the right way to collect
information and informing everyone
vii. Preparing instruments for seasonal crop based production surveys and submitting the
report by making a format of information collection
viii. Solving the problems of the farmers regarding different issues and demands by
creating a good relationship with responsible people in service of the respective office
ix. Helping in the tasks of Additional Director (project implementation and evaluation).
i.
Data entry and analysis by the order of higher authorities and helping them in
preparing reports.
Deputy Director (Project Implementation and Evaluation), Grade-5, Number
of Position-1
Deputy Director (Project Implementation), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Statistical Officer (Project Implementation), Grade-9, Number of Position-1

ii.
Collection, preservation and compilation of information of the projects as per
directions of authorities
iii. Helping in preparing the progress report of annual development programmes
iv.
Helping for projects implementation by the order of higher authorities.
i.
Monitoring and preparing the evaluation report of the approved undergoing or
completed projects
ii.
Field level evaluation of the completed projects and compiling project completion
reports
iii. Regular monitoring of the progress of the project’s implementation at the field level
iv.
Presenting the evaluation and monitoring reports of the projects in the ADP conference
v.
Overall assistance in the Additional Director’s job.
i.
Recording and analysing the information regarding the projects, programmes and
normal activities of DAE and helping the higher authority in preparing reports
ii.
Helping the higher authorities in preparing completion reports of the projects and
programmes
iii. Helping higher authorities in monitoring activities at the field level of DAE and
preparing a report for them
iv.
Helping in different types of agricultural extension research (adaptive, action and
social) by the orders of the authority.
i.
Conducting the ICT management and physical infrastructure activities
ii.
Compiling the agricultural extension activities in the light of 6th generation agriculture
development programmes, climate resilience and e-agriculture considering the
present and future domestic demands
iii. Protecting all ICT properties and conducting ICT activities at field levels
iv.
Making the plans of DAE’s agricultural activities through coordinating with the
Additional Directors of all the wings including planning
v.
Taking initiatives to add e-agriculture ideas and necessary ICT activities while
preparing for the new project
vi. Monitoring the activities of subordinate officers and staffs
vii. Monitoring, evaluation and implementation of the physical works or programmes
conducted by the physical infrastructure development section
Deputy Director (Project Evaluation and Monitoring), Grade-5, Number of
Position-1
Statistical Officer (Project Evaluation and Monitoring), Grade-9, Number of
Position-1
Additional Director (Physical Infrastructure Development and ICT
Management), Grade-3, Number of Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

viii. Coordinating the repair and maintenance of the office transports
ix. Coordinating the repairing and maintenance of different instruments of the office
x.
To coordinate the repairing and maintenance of all the offices of the department
xi. To collect, preserve and make reports of the updated information of the present
infrastructure including the head office of DAE and to help in the inclusion of future
planning of DAE.

i.
To operate activities regarding ICT with the counsel and overall coordination of the
Additional Director of physical infrastructure development and ICT management
ii.
To operate and extend e-agriculture service programmes and to make necessary planning
iii. To ensure the proper use of e-agriculture in headquarters and field levels
iv.
To collect updated data of ICT equipment from the headquarter offices and field levels,
to direct maintaining and repairing activities
v.
To prepare ICT based data of DAE’s officers or employees
vi. To provide necessary help to the Additional Director regarding e-agriculture and to
operate ICT programmes
vii. To supervise the activities of subordinate officers and employees.
i.
To make technical planning of necessary software to operate DAE’s activities according
to the demand
ii.
To install the software provided by vendor, to upload them and to ensure proper use of
all software
iii. To solve all technical problems related to software and to take measures for using
them in future
iv.
To ensure maximum service by coordinating the software supplied by computer
systems and vendors
v.
To keep backup files of all stored data and to recover lost data from damaged systems
or damaged information
vi. To provide necessary opinions after examining new system software and application
software
vii. To coordinate and create effective communication between all equipment and
peripheral devices of ICT system
viii. To operate and observe the making process of application software
ix. To ensure strategic security in case of storing data
x.
To provide assistance in making necessary policies for ICT systems
xi. To implement the superior authority’s instructions and programmes.
Deputy Director (ICT Management), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Programmer (ICT Management), Grade-6, Number of Position-1

Assistant Programmer (ICT Management), Grade-9, Number of Position-1
Assistance Maintenance Engineer (ICT Management), Grade-10, Number of
Position-1
Executive Engineer (Physical Infrastructure), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Mechanical Engineer, Grade-9, Number of Position-1
Assistant Engineer (Physical Infrastructure), Grade-9, Number of Position-2
i.
To prepare primary planning of making necessary application for the ICT based
programmes of DAE
ii.
To operate DAE’s server based online and offline services
iii. To take charge as the admin of database
iv.
To assist the Programmer (ICT Management) extensively
v.
To take charge of ICT related activities with the instructions of superior authorities.
i.
To take charge of all ICT establishments and to maintain all equipment of the
Department of Agricultural Extension
ii.
To make plans and supervise all activities of ICT establishments’ maintenance
iii. To help operate and implement all ICT related programmes with the instructions of
superior authorities.
i.
To prepare, implement and supervise the design of physical works of the department
ii.
To make the planning of supervision and implementation of electrical activities,
mechanical activities and when needed repletion or physical works related activities
iii. To fasten/enhance the electrical, mechanical and physical works of the construction
process of different projects as well as the department’s own
iv.
To counsel and coordinate with Additional Director (Physical Infrastructure
Development and ICT Management) regarding repletion work and others
i.
To collect and maintain the vehicles of the department and to keep record of them
ii.
To plan for ensuring proper use of all equipment of field levels including DAE’s
headquarter's vehicles and other repairing works
iii. To help in observing and repairing the equipment of all the offices of DAE regularly
iv.
To perform duties in accordance with the instructions of superior authorities.
i.
To assist the Executive Engineer regarding all the establishments, repair and collection
of the projects of the department.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

ii.
To supervise all the field level activities for implementation
iii. To assist in any involved work related to all these with the instructions of the superior
authority.
i.
To perform duties according to their own department
ii.
To extend necessary assistance to Assistant Engineer (Physical Infrastructure)
iii. To assist in any involved work related to all these with the instructions of the superior
authority.
i.
To monitor directly after visiting the field level activities implemented by the
development project and programmes under DAE
ii.
To evaluate the implemented activity under projects and programmes according to
the goal and aim of it and to prepare reports
iii. To identify the successes and obstacles of the implemented activities under projects
and programmes, to prepare report mentioning necessary suggestions and to send it
to the involved authority
iv.
To prepare completed projects’s report according to their demand of baseline surveys
and mid-term evaluation
v.
To assist in the directed works with the instructions of the superior authority.
i.
To assist in preparing proper monitoring-reports of the field level activity of DAE’s
different development projects and programmes
ii.
To assist the Superior Officer in case of data collection, entry and processing of
researches (adaptive, action and solar) related to agricultural extension
iii. To help in preparing the baseline survey, midterm evaluation, effect or impact
evaluation according to the demand of the project
iv.
To collect and preserve information related to the project and to inform authorities
v.
To evaluate the implemented activity and programme as per the goal and aim of it and
to prepare reports
vi. To identify project achievements and challenges, and develop reports accommodating
recommendations and send them to relevant authorities
vii. To complete the work directed by superior authorities.
Sub-assistant Engineer (Physical Infrastructure), Grade-10, Number of Position-4
* Monitoring and Evaluation Officer (Project Evaluation and Monitoring),
Grade-6, Number of Position-1
* Scientific Officer (Project Evaluation and Monitoring), Grade-9, Number of
Position-1

* Research Officer, Grade-9, Number of Position-5
Director, Grade-2, Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Cash Crops), Grade-3, Number of Position-1
i.
Collection of information from all DAE’s wings, and extending supports in the
preparation of short-term, mid-term and long-term programme plans
ii.
Preparing project proposals targeting international funding, and liaising with relevant
organizations
iii. Giving informed opinion on projects and development programmes funded or
managed by different organizations
iv.
Sending reports as per guidelines from the Ministry
v.
Extending overall supports to the Department as per guidelines of the higher authority
* (The present revisit does not mention this position although officials exist with the same
designation in reality. The proposed revised terms of revisit have been suggested for
inclusion)
i.
To make cultivation and production plans of all field crops and supervision, monitoring
and acting as a chief coordinator for implementation
ii.
To act as a main coordinator for extension of all field crops production technologies
iii. To play a main role in management of quality seed production, preservation and
distribution
iv.
To make policies and coordinate quality seed production at farmers' levels and to
inspect all the projects taken to increase production of seeds and supervising,
monitoring and collaborating the progress of project implementation
v.
To organize training programmes in order to implement crop production technologies
properly
vi. Applying the improved cultivation techniques for jute by strengthening activities and
unifying the jute farmers' associations providing support for a better production at
farmers' levels for all kinds of cash crops along with jute
vii. To administrate the activities following the government policy in tobacco production
and issuing a certificate of ‘Country of Origin’ for the tobacco export
viii. To provide help and support in drawing national policies for agricultural development
ix. To provide supports in different works of the Director General and completing the
work by coordinating with different wings.
i.
To take care of the technicalities in production of jute, sugarcane and other cash crops
and development of the jute and sugarcane products
ii.
To make production policies, implement them, supervise and examine the cultivation
of jute, sugarcane and other cash crops
Crops Wing
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

iii. Collecting the technology and information of production of jute, sugarcane and other
cash crops and establishing technical communication with corresponding
organisations and expansion of the technology through field demonstrations
iv.
Identifying the field level problems with the production of the cash crops and
reporting them to research institutes and applying the solutions to field levels again
v.
Preparing extension messages about the latest technologies for the cash crops and
training the corresponding or involved officers about it
vi. Providing directions about jute, sugarcane and other cash crop production to the field
level officers through their respective Heads of the offices (region or district)
vii. Advising the designated policiesmaker organisations by the government with the
technicalities regarding the production, usage, distribution and easy marketing of the
cash crops
viii. Coordinating between the regional or district Heads and the respective research
institutes for the expansion of modern technologies invented in research institutes
regarding the production and use of the cash crops
ix. To take necessary initiatives to ensure proper price of sugarcane by increasing use of
sugarcane in the small molasses production centre set up by the sugarcane farmers
outside the sugar mill area
x.
To administrate the activities in tobacco production following the policies and helping
the Director in issuing a ‘Country of Origin’ certificate.
** Cash crops are mainly jute, sugarcane, betel leaf and tobacco. Other cash crops are
bamboo, cane, palmyra palm , dates, palm and palm leaves.
i.
Observing the technical responsibilities of jute production and its developments
ii.
Collecting the technology and information regarding jute production and expanding
the proper technology by field demonstrations with the corresponding organisations
and carrying duties of production policy making, implementation, supervision and
examination of jute cultivation
iii. Identifying the field level problems with jute production and communicating with
respective research institutes for solution and launching of the solution at field levels
and coordinating with other institutes
iv.
Preparing extension messages about the latest technology regarding jute and
providing necessary training to the respective officers
v.
Giving directions to the officers involved in jute production at field levels through
respective heads of the offices of regions or districts
vi. Advising the government designated policymaker organisation with the technicalities
regarding the production, usage, distribution and easy marketing of jute.
Deputy Director (Jute Production and Marketing), Grade-5, Number of
Position-1

vii. Coordinating between the regional or district heads and the respective research
institutes for the extension of modern technologies invented in native research
institutes regarding the production and use of jute
viii. Applying the modern jute cultivation techniques and determining price at farmers'
levels by organizing the farmers through strengthening of the association activities.
i.
Cultivation and production policy making, implementation, supervision of and
monitoring sugarcane as well as other cash crops
ii.
Technical responsibilities in the production of sugarcane and other cash crops and
development of sugarcane products
iii. Technological development and collection of information from the outer world about
sugarcane and other cash crops production and establishing a technical
communication with the corresponding institution with extension of proper
technologies through field demonstration
iv.
Identifying the field level problems with sugarcane production and communicating
with respective research institutes for solution and launching of the solution at field
levels and coordinating with other institutes
v.
Preparation of extension messages on the latest technology regarding sugarcane and
other related cash crops and providing necessary training to the respective officers
vi. Giving directions to the officers involved in sugarcane production at field levels
through respective heads of the offices of regions or districts
vii. Advising the government designated policy maker organisation with the technicalities
regarding the production, usage, distribution and easy marketing of sugarcane
viii. Coordinating between the regional or district heads and the respective research
institutes for extension of modern technologies invented in native research institutes
regarding the use and production of sugarcane
ix.
Applying the modern sugarcane cultivation techniques and determining price at farmers'
levels by organizing the farmers through strengthening of the association activities
x.
Conducting the tobacco production following the government policy.
i.
Technological development and collection of information from the outer world about
sugarcane and other cash crops production and establishing a technical
communication with the corresponding institutions and extension of proper
technologies through field demonstration
7. Deputy Director (Sugarcane and other Cash Crops), Grade-5, Number of
Position-1
Additional Deputy Director (Sugarcane and other Cash Crops), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

ii.
Technical responsibilities in the production of sugarcane and other cash crops
iii.
Collecting the technology invented in local research institutes regarding the production
and use of sugarcane and other cash crops and submitting it to the higher the authorities
iv.
Providing supports in implementation, evaluation and supervision of nationally
undertaken projects at field levels
v.
Spreading the latest technology extension message regarding jute and providing
necessary training to the respective officers
vi. Conducting the tobacco production following the government policy.
i.
Providing technical supports in jute cultivation, processing, marketing and
development of jute products
ii.
Technological development and collection of information from the outer world about
jute production and establishing a technical communication with the corresponding
institutions and extension of proper technologies through field demonstration
iii. Identifying the field level problems with jute production and communicating with
respective research institutes for the solutions of respective problems and launching
the solution at field levels and coordinating with other institutes
iv.
Providing supports for extension of modern technologies in use of jute products
invented in local research institutes
v.
Providing supports in implementation, evaluation and supervision of nationally
undertaken projects at field levels
vi. Preparation of extension messages on the latest technologies regarding jute and
providing necessary training to the respective officers.
i.
Observing the duty in cultivation, production plan making, implementation,
supervision and monitoring of cereal and oil crops
ii.
Technical responsibilities in the development of cereal, oil, pulses and other crops
iii. Adequate technology planning and successfully running the expansion programme of
cereal, oil and pulses crops in Bangladesh
iv.
Ensuring the supply of quality seeds and coordinating between the seed production
and business parties
v.
Taking initiatives in establishing inter institutional relation among different
institutions to bring the pace in the activities
vi. Identifying non-conventional crops production technology, extension, policy making
and submitting to the higher authorities for implementation, providing supports in
proper management of human resources in extension of non-conventional crops
vii. Identifying the problems in the production of non-conventional crops and taking initiatives
for arranging conference with the research institutes for a research based solution.
8. Additional Deputy Director (Jute Production and Marketing ), Grade-6,
Number of Position-1
Additional Director (Cereal and Oil Crops), Grade-3, Number of Position-1

Deputy Director (Cereal Crops), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
Deputy Director ( Pulses, Oil and other Crops), Grade-5, Number of Position-1
i.
Cultivation, production policy making, implementation, supervision of rice, wheat and
other cereal crops
ii.
Management and coordinating of activities regarding extension of modern cultivation
technologies of rice, wheat and other cereal crops
iii. Identification and collection of rice, wheat and extension activities of the cultivation
technology of other cereal crops and reporting to the higher authorities for
implementation
iv.
Providing supports to higher authorities in proper management, policy making of the
human resources management for the extension of technologies on rice, wheat and
other cereal crops
v.
Identifying the problems in field level production of rice and communicating with the
research institute for the solutions and field level launching with the solutions and
collaboration with other organisations
vi. Providing supports to the Additional Director to bring pace in activities through
collaborating with different organisations.
i.
Performing the duty in cultivation, production, policymaking, implementation,
supervision and observation of pulses, oil and other crops
ii.
Managing and coordinating extension activities of modern technologies of pulses, oil
and other crops
iii.
Identification and policy making of the modern technology extension activities of pluses,
oil and other crops and submitting it to the higher authorities for implementation
iv.
Providing supports to the Additional Director for the collaboration of modern
technology extension activities management
v.
Providing supports to the higher authorities in technological extension of pulses, oil
and other crops, proper management of human resources and policy making
vi. Identifying the problems with production of pluses and oil at field levels and
communicating with the research institutes for the solution of the problems and
launching at field levels with the solutions and collaboration with other organizations
vii. Identification, policymaking of non-conventional crop’s technological extension
activities and submitting to the higher authorities for implementation and providing
supports to the higher authorities in human resources management and policy
making regarding the technological extension of all these non-conventional crops
viii. Identifying problems with the field level production of non-conventional crops and
communicating with research institutes for solution and field level launching with
solution and collaboration with different organisations
ix. Providing supports to the Additional Director in creating an inter-organisational
relation for development and pace the activities.
The Duties and Responsibilities of Extension Officers of the Department of Agricultural Extension

Additional Deputy Director (Cereal Crops), Grade-6, Number of Position-1
Additional Deputy Director ( Pulses, Oil and other Crops), Grade-6, Number of
Position-1
i.
Development of technologies in cereal crop production and collecting the
technological development information from the outer world and establishing a
communication with the corresponding institution and providing the help or aid for
extension activities of the technology through field demonstration
ii.
Additional Deputy Director will be under the authority of Deputy Director for
production of cereal crops
iii. Aiding with planning, implementation, supervision in the production of cereal crops
iv.
Providing supports to production of the cereal crops, instigation of new varieties and
technological supports with the cultivation and harvest
v.
Overall support in production and preservation of high quality cereal crops seed.
vi. Sorting out the obstacles in field level production of cereal crops and taking necessary
steps to solve them
vii. Providing supports to the implementation, evaluation and supervision of the activities
adopted from national levels.
i.
Providing supports to the making of production plan of pulses, oil and other crops,
implementation and supervision of plans
ii.
He will be under the supervision of Deputy Director for the technical responsibilities of
the production of pulses, oil and other related crops
iii. Instigating new varieties and providing technical supports to cultivation
iv.
Overall supports to production and preservation of high quality seeds of pulses, oil and
other crops
v.
Sorting out the obstacles at field level production of oil, pulses and other crops and
taking necessary steps to solve them
vi. Providing supports to the implementation, evaluation and supervision of the activities
adopted from national levels
vii. Identification, policy making of non-conventional crop’s technological extension
activities and submitting to the higher authorities for implementation and providing
supports to the higher authorities in human resources management and policy
making regarding the technological extension of all these non-conventional crops
viii. Identifying problems with the field level production of non-conventional crops and
communicating with research institutes for solution and field level launching with
solution and collaboration with different organisations
ix. Development of technologies in pulses, oil and other crop production and collecting
the technological development information from the outer world and establishing a
communication with the corresponding institutions and providing the help or aid for
extension activities of proper technologies through field demonstration.

Partnership
Chapter

5.1 Partnership and Its Importance to the Agricultural Extension
Partnership in agricultural extensions means- “Department of Agricultural Extension,
Directorate and other partners in order to achieve the intended purpose based on mutual
trust and understanding by building up a spontaneous relationship, provides effective and
fruitful services together or cooperatively in the context of agricultural extension.”
Partnership gives the opportunity to the partner organizations to work together in order to
provide a coordinated and mutually helpful services to the farmers and the partner
organizations. Partnership is highly successful only when the under-implemented activities
are relaxed for the partner organizations and maintains a good relationship between them.
Partnership is an integral part of the overall activities for the department of Agricultural
Extension. In the new agricultural extension law policy 1996 and the revised expansive
extension action approach, working in partnership has been considered as the fundamental
important responsibility of DAE.
In National Agriculture Policy 2013, partnership has been specially emphasised upon. In
National Agriculture Policy 2013, it has been said:
i.
Participatory extension activities of government, non-government and private
organizations will be encouraged
ii.
Government-non-government partnership will be encouraged in producing
agricultural products
iii. Strategies will be undertaken to deliver extension services in collaboration with local
government at union and upazila levels; and in union and upazilla levels, local
government will help extension works by providing services and different activities
iv. The government through the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) and allied
agencies will maintain liaison with the NGOs and other development partners at local
levels for cooperation and coordination. For support and coordination government
will maintain communication among local agriculture extension departments private
organizations via agencies of the same communion and other developing partners.
By working through partnerships, partner organizations can learn from one another and
increase their work efficiency, and despite their weaknesses in authority and assets they can
achieve the ability to formulate promising plans and to implement them; for example- nongovernment organizations can have shortage of agriculture specialist, but in that case nongovernment organizations can successfully contribute by taking supports from agricultural
extension directorate in farmer training or planning and implementing some other expansive
activities. On the other hand, working with farmer organizations or groups is a policy of the
extension directorate’s expansive actions; in this case agricultural extension directorate can
provide services for farmer organizations and other organizations formed by non-government
organizations.
Partnership

Partnership
The cooperation or linkage betweeen extension and research organization goes back. As a
result of this linkage, extension workers collect knowledge from research and information
from research organizations and distribute them among farmers and can take steps to solve
field level problems with the help of research. Besides, extension-research coalition can make
vital contributions in extending agriculture and its production and productivity. Proper
marketing of the grown crops and suitable pricing encourages the expansive activities. Mutual
support and information sharing between the extension directorate and market related
organizations can help farmers with marketing activities as well as correct price earning.
Department of Agricultural Extension is committed to working in partnership with other
service providing organizations.
i.
Providing demand driven and coordinated extension services
ii.
Sharing strengths and weaknesses of partnering organizations to provide services to
farmers
iii. Reducing organizations’ costs
iv. Encouraging partners in increasing efficiency and extension services
v.
Working on a large scale with the farmers in extension services in less time and budget
vi. To save money and assets by reducing repetitions
vii. To increase the capability of people and organizations involved
Official partnerships will be based on memorandum of understanding (MoU) or a written
agreement between partners. Partnership can be based on joint activities, assets and
strength sharing and contributing to mutual support and cooperation. For examples:
i.
Partnerships through MoUs and contracts between government and nongovernment organizations and extension organizations to achieve mutual goals
ii.
Supporting NGOs to provide human resources and agricultural extension services in
accordance with the agreement with DAE
5.2 Purpose of Working in Partnership
5.3 Types of Partnership
5.3.1 Partnership Can be of Two Types Based on The Types of Activities
5.3.1.1 Formal or Collaborative Partnership

5.3.1.2 Informal Partnership
Apart from formal agreements, partners can work in mutual partnership. The informal
Partnership can play an active role in sharing resources and strength, maintaining mutual
cooperation; exchanging views, consulting each other and so on. Extension service providing
organizations are providing services through various unofficial coalitions, such as:
i.
Department of Agricultural Extension officers can work as resource persons in farmer
training organized by NGOs
ii.
Department of Agricultural Extension and research organizations' workers can work in
field supervision and farm fair together
iii. Partners can share facilities and assets like training rooms, training materials' etc
Figure 5: Types of partnerships are briefly described below
Mode
Status
Characteristics
Interaction
Formal
Formal or Informal
Formal or Informal
Joint activities, mutual
dependence and success
depend on fulfilling
responsibilities of each party’.
Neutral communication (For
example- assets or information
sharing), or mutual
cooperation (for example
exchanging ideas, joint visit)
Opposing or conflicting
neutral or helpful
Based on: Farrington and Bbbington, 1995
Collaborative
or Joint
Cooperation
Interaction

Department of Agricultural Extension encourages partnership both fromally and informally,
and provides service in accordance with workplaces and their demand. Working with other
organizations formally and informally is an essencial part of the fundamental responsibilities
of Department of Agricultral Extension
i.
Partnership with a government organization
ii.
Partnership with an NGO
iii. Partnership with a private ownership
DAE can be partner with another government organization both officially and unofficially.
Agricultural extension department and local government engineering directorate are
materialising are small scale water development sector on the basis of an MoU.
Agricultural Extension department, Animal Resources Directorate and Fish Resources
Directorate can be partner officially and unofficially via a memorandum of understanding.
Animal Resources Directorate, Fish Resources Directorate, Forest Directorate, Bangladesh
Agriculture Development Corporation and other Research organization’s partnership in a zila
or upazila farm fair is exemplary.
DAE is interested in working with NGOs. But it is noticable that NGOs involved with agriculture
have different characteristics, activities, skills, expertise etc. Agricultural Extension
department must be aware of these matters before getting involved with the NGOs.
In order to get the best result from the NGOs, Agriculture Extension department must reduce
their differences to establish good relationships and identify and encourage their
characteristics, activities, skills, expertise, innovation etc. No matter how large or small the
NGOs are, they have local popularity and communication skills to materialize activities. Their
abilities should used for the benefit of people.
NGOs work in groups or teams headed by team leaders. DAE can use the experience of the
5.3.2 Partnership Can be of Three Types Based on the Nature and Class of the
Organization
3.3.2.1 Partnership with a Goverment Organization
5.3.2.2 Partnership with NGOs
Partnership

NGOs when creating a farmer groups. With their help they can identify the information
demanded by the members and help the team they created to extand and provide service to
them.
Private ownership in Bangladesh is emerging. These are related to farming equipment, inputs
and product selling. Clearly, private farms are interested in increasing their interaction with
farmers to market their products and increase their sales. In this case, DAE can benefit from a
partnership, also help farmers to get farming inputs and equipment from private companies.
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) is an essential tool for development in developing countries.
PPP has been prioritized to achieve SGDs. PPP has been given further importance for
infrastructural development along with many other types of development activities. PPPs
have been prevalent in Bangladesh as well. Private sector’s participation in agriculture has
been emphasized in the 7th National five-year plan.
PPP can be categorized into three kinds- Macro, Meso and Micro
i.
Macro level PPP takes place in central offices. For example, if there is an agreement
between DAE’s central office (Head office) and private company’s central office (Head
office), it can be an example of PPP
ii.
Meso-level PPP’s can be an agreement between DAE’s local office and private
company’s local offices.
iii. Micro level PPP can take place if partnership is solely conducted in root levels. An
example of micro level PPP is Katalyst’s LAN (local agri-business network) project that
has formed PPI committees in root levels.
5.3.2.3 Partnership with a Private Farm
5.4.1Types of PPP
5.4 Public-Private Ownership (PPP)

5.5 Strategies of Extension Partnership
Partnerships have been highly prioritized in the new agricultural extension policy of 1996. A
number of committees have been formed at national and regional levels to ensure the
implementation of partnerships. For example, Extension Policy Implementation Cooperative
Coordination Committee (EPICC), National Agricultural Technical Cooperative Coordination
Committee (NATCC), DAE or NGO liaison committee, Agricultural Technical Committee (ATC),
Division District Extension Policy Planning Committee (DEPC), Upazila Planning Workshop
(UPW), Upazila Agricultural Extension Coordination Committee (UAECC).The budgets for the
activities of these programmes are allocated from DI’s ASIRP project. Budget is allocated
immediately after planning. As a result, the normal courses of the committees are hampered.
Partnership activities are practiced as a result of these activities taken by these committees.
The NATP programme began in 2007-08 and since then significant importance has been given
to partnerships at the national level through the National Extension Coordinating Committee
(NECC).
The NECC emphasizes partnership through its programs in 25 districts, 120 upazilas through
smaller similiar committees (DECC & UECC) and funding for the programmes was also
arranged. Current 2016-17 fiscal year marks the beginning of 2nd wave of activities consisting
57 districts and 270 upazilas and similar district or upazila coordinating committees actions
were also arranged.
Very recently, BARC and DAE reconstructed and renamed national, local, divisional and
upazila level commitees and took steps to mobilize these units.
According to the new title, the local level committee will be called Regional Agricultural
Technical Coordinating Committee (RATCC), RTC in short, and it will work in 14 areas under DE.
The district level will be renamed as District Agricultural Coordinating Committee (DATCC),
DTC in short, and upazila level will be renamed as Upazila Agricultural Coordinating
Committee (UATCC), UTC in short. It has been decided that the committees will have 3
meetings every year.
Programmes of the meeting are as fallowsUpazila Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (UTC)
10th August
15th January
15th May
District Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (DTC)
30th August
30th January
30th May
Regional Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (RTC)
15th September
15th February
15th June
National Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (NTC)
30th September
01 March
25th June
Title of the Committee
1st Meeting
2nd Meeting
3rd Meeting
(for Robi season)
(for Kharif-I)
(for Kharif-II)
Partnership

In order to encourage partnerships, there are other forums such as – Research Institute
Coordination Committee (RICC), Research Planning Workshop etc. DAE assesses demands of
farmer's make plans for extension and emplements them, provides extension services and so
on; and it will have full cooperation from all these committees.
DAE will always try to increase its resources and abilities by creating partnerships and
extension activities undertaken by the department through Agriculture Fairs, Field Days, Joint
Field Supervision, Natural Disaster Prevention etc. Government, NGOs and private farms will
be encouraged to partner; at the same time, all partner organizations come forward to create
opportunity to partner in expansive activities.
In order to make partnership strong and long-lasting, DAE will emphasize on mutual
relationships with the partners. Partnership is not a competition.
Matters to be considered in a partnership:
i.
Partner organizations will work by defining their goals
ii.
Partner organisations’ activities will be based on mutual understanding in order to
fulfil them
iii. Partners will benefit from their partnership in their own ways
iv. Partners will maintain honesty and fairness
v.
Partners will always be encouraged to help one another
vi. Any kind of confusion or unfairness will be solved by mutual discussions
vii. Partners will always work on mutual understanding and it will be maintained for the
sake of both the parties
viii. Partners will share a common perspective.
Regional and district level organizations under the Ministry of Agriculure are advised to
organize monthly coordination meetings. Deputy Director of DAE in the district levels and
Additional Director of of DAE in the regional levels arrange meetings. Representativs of
several organizations under Agriculture Ministry such as - BADC, Agriculture Research
Organizations, Fisheris and Livestock Departments etc.
In these meetings, updates on all related activities, their progress, the vision and achievement
strategies, encouragement in partnership and its strategies etc. are discussed. This committee
5.6 Coordination Meeting of Organisations Under Ministry of
Agriculture Encourage Partnership

can contribute largely to partnership relationship development and strengthening. The
activities of this committee will be directed in such a way that all the partners are benefitted
and the extension of partnership helps achieve mutual capabilities.
Among the extension service providers , Department of Agricultural Extension is the largest
and in this department, there is collection of ranked, skilled and strong leading manpower.
This organization takes most of the responsilbilities for any problem of the farmers, and
enhances development and productivity in agriculture sector. So, Department of Agricultural
Extension has to contribute more to the development and maintainance of partnership for
providing skilled and fruitful service to the farmers.
Relationship building and maintaining strategies vary from one place to another. Extension
department has to sensitize workers of all the levels about the organization’s activities,
environment, condition etc. and encourage them to cooperate and enhance their skills in this
regard.
Mutual supports or facilities that can be achieved through partnership are:
i.
By using the experience and skills of NGOs, the opportunity to provide services to all
kinds of farmers like female farmers, small and marginal farmers will be created.
ii.
Experience of the NGOs can be shased while working with the farmer groups and
organisations
iii. Partnerships can help large scale extension planning or activity in their strategies and
execution
iv.
Partner organizations will be able to develop mutual skills and strength
v.
A correct decision can be reached upon by unanimous participation in decision making
vi. It will be posible to complete extension activities properly by mutual cooperatiom
vii. High standard extension service can be provided by partnerships
viii. Coordinated services area will expand
ix.
Financial support from NGOs will create new ways of extension activities
x.
Farmers will receive proper services faster
xi.
The scope of “One Stop Service” will be created.
“One Stop Service” is a current demand. A farmer does not only grow plants, he or she rears
livestock and farms fishes. The demands of farmers are to get services regarding plants,
animals, fishes and other sectors at one place. Recently, the centres established in union
parishad complexes are providing one stop service, which is exemplary in integrated
extension service.
5.7 DAE’s Role in the Development and Maintainance of Partnership
5.8 Benefits of Partnership
Partnership

Working With
Farmer Groups
Chapter

6.1 Background
6.2 Benefits of Working With Farmer Groups
Training and Visit (T&V) method has gained special reputation as the disciplined basis of
extension activities in the Department of Agricultural Extension. However, one of the drawbacks
of this method is that it requires one to one interaction with individual farmers. So, under the
revised extension work approach, emphasis has been given to work with farmers groups. This
approach has been recognised as one of the key principles of revised extension approach.
The meaning of working with farmers in groups is to work with many farmers at the same
time; such as while setting up demonstration, discussion with the farmers regarding selection
of demonstration farmer, sharing overall activities and result of demonstration among the
group members, arranging field day in the demonstration place and so on. The extension
workers will play roles as facilitators while working in farmer’s groups.
Giving emphasis on the group does not necessarily mean that working with individual farmers
would be stopped. In addition to farmer groups, individual farmers may be part of extension
activity. Such as any farmer outside the group may be communicated and given extension service
as per demand. But in case of implementing extension programmes, the group will get priority.
Working with farmer groups ensures active participation of farmers and increases the
responsibility and accountability of extension workers. As per Department of Agricultural
Extension (DAE), the most notable usefulness or utility is as follows:
It is possible to communicate with many farmers quickly and at a time
ii.
All categories of farmers, such as male, female, youth, small, medium, large, marginal
and landless can work together
iii. Make greater chances of effective and sustainable extension activities
iv. Information can spread out quickly and easily
v.
Difficult work can be done easily
vi. Active participation of a large number of farmers can be ensured
vii. Farmers get the chance of mutual interaction, as a result their knowledge and skills
increase, learning develop and members can be financially benefitted.
i.
Working With Farmer Groups
Agricultural Extension Manual 143

Working With Farmer Groups
vi
Farmer’s skill is increased by solving their own problems mutually not by depending on
others’ and problems selected information flow will develop
ix. The knowledge and information of any of the farmers can help increase the knowledge
and information of other members
x.
Effective information needs can be fulfilled easily
xi. Participating in groups ensures credibility of the extension work and the adoption rate
of technology or extension work increases
xii. The confidence level of the group members becomes stronger
xiii. Rights become established while obtaining service from any aid organisations
xiv. Innovativeness of the group members increases.
A few limitations of working with farmer groups are as follows:
i.
At the initial stage of working with farmer groups, extra time may be needed and extra
work may be required to get their attraction or interest
ii.
Some of the members of the group may try to influence and take advantage again
and again
iii. Any negative reaction of a member may have impact on others and the natural pace of
activities may be hindered
iv. For lack of individual communication, it might not be possible to enter the root of the
problem
v.
All members may not be equally interested and it could be difficult to ensure their
regular and timely presence
vi. Mutual conflict among the members may threaten the existence of the group and the
extension work may be hampered, etc.
There are many government, non-government or private groups in every village or block. But
most of the groups are constituted by NGOs. Every group has certain purposes. One particular
group might not be eligible for the purposes of others.
ii.
6.3 Limitations of Working with Farmer Groups
6.4 Farmer Groups with Which DAE Would Work
The extension workers will try technically to solve the above mentioned limitations. They
will also require involvement of other organizations or take help of higher competent
authority.

Ÿ
DAE provides extension services in its own periphery through its resources among farmer
groups. The groups that DAE works with are called “DAE Farmer Groups”.
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) has been providing extension services for a long
time under various projects through farmer field schools or farmer groups. These types of
activities are still continuing. Farmer groups are playing a significant role in implementing
projects successfully. Some farmer groups or farmer field schools turned into farmer clubs and
are contributing in extension work. On the other hand, many groups remain passive and
inactive for lack of proper management system.
The extension department can establish ‘DAE farmer groups’ by reforming field schools or
groups of the farmers and can combine them in mainstream activities of DAE. Gradually, these
groups can be assets of DAE and may contribute to the increase of agricultural production and
growth of productivity by strong participation in extension work. The descriptions of various
farmer groups under different projects of DAE are as follows:
SPPS (FFS)
AEC (FFS)
IPM (FFS)
IFMC (FFS)
TTAP-BLUE GOLD (FFS)
IAPP (LFS)
SCDP (SFG)
NATP (CIG)
DCRMA (CFS)
ASSSRBP
IANFP
SCPP-IPM
6.5 Description of Farmer Groups Formed by DAE
Table 3: Description of Farmer Groups Formed under Different Projects of the
Department of Agricultural Extension
Serial
Name of project
Total Groups
Number of IPM

No.
Number of FFS
Club
Total

6.6 Allocation of Groups in Block
6.7 Formation or Reformation of Farmer Groups
SAAO’s diary records the size of their block, number of farmer families and agriculture related
information such as area of cultivated land, single, double and triple cropped area, cultivated
area under different crops, cropping intensity, irrigation areas etc. are noted. SAAOs will have
detailed information on farm families. They will exchange views with farmer representatives
and will discuss about the purpose of farmer groups elaborately. With the consent of
representatives, the block area will be divided into 12 parts. SAAO will explain the purpose to
the representatives and for the sake of extension work, will arrange the formation of farmer
groups in each of the 12 parts. The activities of SAAOs will be monitored by AEO or AAO and will
permit division of the block in parts.
Formation or reformation of farmer groups for extension work is a complex task. For this, best
farmers from the groups are chosen to discuss the purposes. Experiences are necessary for
formation or reformation of groups. SAAO bears the main responsibility of this. Suggestions and
help from the local people or members of local government may be obtained if any complexity
arises. AEO or AAO will monitor the group formation work and the UAO would approve it. The
Upazila Agriculture Office will preserve the list of new and reformed groups. Each group will get
recognition through official letters from Upazila Agriculture Office.
The following points will be followed for group formation or reformation:
A SAAO will divide his working block into 12 parts; each part will consist of a farmer
group.
ii.
New farmer groups will be formed in place where no DAE farmer group exists
iii. For formation or reformation of farmer groups, the SAAO should know about
concerned areas and people of the area well
iv. The farmers interested in group formation or reformation should be spotted and the
actual purpose of group formation or reformation should be communicated to them
through meetings
v.
Farmers present will form or reform the group by their own initiative, extension
workers only will help them
vi. Groups will be formed in partnership with local NGOs and partner organizations. Their
help may be taken to form groups
vii. The group will have representation from all classes of farmers
viii. Number of female farmers will be at least 30% of total members.
i.
Working With Farmer Groups

Individual influence of members will be tackled carefully
x.
Group leaders will ensure that the groups are sustainable and efficient
xi. The group will comprise, if necessary, of a convener, a secretary and a cashier (if
needed for financial savings)
xii. The group will be monitored as per promulgated rules
xiii. SAAOs will play skilled and technical roles to operate the group.
i.
Number of farmer groups in each block will be at least 12, conforming to the periodical
visit schedule of SAAO. It is to be noted that a SAAO can meet each farmer group for
once every fortnight.
ii.
The number of members in every group can be maximum 30. Time will be wasted and
purpose of extension activity will be obstructed if the groups are too small, if the group
is too big, then it may lose its effectiveness and purpose.
Before understanding the methods of making farmer groups effective and sustainable, the
reasons of being ineffective or unsustainable should be considered. It is a principle of revised
extension approach to work with farmer groups. So, if the group becomes inactive or fails to
carry on its responsibilities, then the application of revised extension approach becomes
meaningless. The maxim of revised extension approach is to ‘work with farmer groups’.
Reasons why the farmer groups become inactive or unsustainable is given below:
i.
Lack of skill or defect in service providing organization
ii.
The surrounding or condition of community
iii. Unsound mutual relationship of groups
iv. Other external problems.
The extension worker must be alert to make farmer groups active and sustainable and he
should be aware of factors leading to the loss of effectiveness and prevent them.
The following points can be considered for active and sustainable farmer groups:
i.
The extension worker should build close relationship with members apart from
extension activities
ii.
Groups should be visited according to the fortnightly visit schedule, otherwise the
interest of farmers may be obstructed
ix.
6.8 Block-wise Farmer Group Number and Number of Members
Groups
6.9 Possible Ways to Make the Group Effective and Sustainable

Extension service should be ensured to the members of the group on demand basis
iv. Apart from theoretical discussion with groups, visiting crop harvests should be given
importance
v.
Special aid to be given to the members regarding market management of produced
harvest, value chain, supply chain, production plan etc.
vi. At the initial stage, the problem of members should be solved and demands should be
fulfilled based on the behaviour of members. They should be given clear idea about
things by explanation.
vii. No member should be allowed to cause disturbance in the group through individual
influence
viii. All members should be given equal importance and equal opportunity for expressing
opinion
ix. Members should be encouraged to undertake various activities such as savings or
income increasing activities
x.
Members should be made aware of latest technologies in agriculture and given proper
support to avail them
xi. Group members should be given the chance of mutual interaction
xii. To add a new member in the group, consent of other members should be taken
xiii. Group management and technical skill of SAAO will be vital for ensuring effectiveness
and sustainability of the group. So, SAAO must be skilled on all concerned matters.
The duration and effectiveness of farmer groups solely depend on the skill of extension
worker or SAAO with farmer groups. Therefore, extension workers or SAAO should be aware
of their skills in this regard.
The following required skills should be achieved:
i.
Skill and experience for maintaining good relationship with group members
ii.
Skill on identifying and managing the demands of group members
iii. Experience in managing any influential member for maintaining cohesiveness among
the members of the group
iv. Patience and sharp in dealing with matters for all the activities with group
v.
SAAO should be kind hearted to quickly solve problems faced by group member
vi. SAAO should be skilled in management system as a helping hand
vii. Ability to acquire modern and suitable knowledge on technology
viii. Expert in creating environment for interaction with members of group
ix. Ability to connect with the agricultural product supply and agriculture market.
iii.
6.10 Skill of Extension Worker to Work with Farmer Groups
Working With Farmer Groups

Farmer's Information
Need Assessment
Chapter

7.1 Background
One of the principles of “Revised extension activities” is to respond to the information-need
of farmers. For this, the extension worker must be able to determine farmers’ informationneeds. Farmers’ Information-needs Assessment (FINA) is likely to determine the major
problems that farmers face and the availability of possible solutions to farmers’ problems. The
solutions have to be appropriate for the farmers.
Necessity of Farmer’s Information Need Assessment (FINA)
It is necessary that farmers' information-need is assessed because:
i.
Assessment of information-need ensures demand-driven extension service
ii.
Adopted agenda in extension work plans become suitable to reach the goal
iii. It can increase participation of farmers in extension work
iv. Farmers can be aware of appropriate technologies
v.
It saves cost of extension activities
vi. Creates responsibility towards farmers.
Use of FINA in Extension Work
i.
For the preparation of suitable extension messages
ii.
For determining annual performance work-plans
iii. For the making of plans for annual extension programmes
iv. During the identification of suitable extension methods
v.
For preparation the training programme for extension workers and farmers
vi. For determining the demand of inputs, its collection and distribution activities
vii. During the placement of recommendation for invention of suitable technologies
viii. During the making of work plans of SAAOs
ix. For conducting the monitoring and evaluation activities
x.
During the creation of primary information hubs for use whenever necessary.
Farmer's Information Need Assessment

7.2 Methods Of Farmer's Information Need Assessment
7.3 Inter-Personal Communication to Manage Extension Work
By individual contact and during various extension events
ii.
By conducting Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA)
iii. By formal survey
iv. By discussing with and collecting information from field workers during regular
meeting and training at Upazila level
v.
By reviewing the SAAO diary, demonstration register, periodical or monthly report and
surveillance report
vi. By giving encouragement to farmers
vii. By interacting with different organisations involved in providing extension service
viii. Through remote sensing.
There is scope for discussion on farmers’ problems, challenges, opportunities and
information-needs when the extension workers interact with farmers.
Through the following method, extension workers may interact with farmers:
i.
During the field visits, demonstrations and meetings with farmers
ii.
When the farmers visit agricultural advisory centres and plant health clinics
iii. During various group based extension work, such as method demonstration, field day,
farmers’ rally, motivational tours, farmer’s training, farmer field school etc.
iv. SAAOs can learn and solve the problems of farmers through team meetings and yardmeetings
v
During informal discussion in various social places such as mosques, temples, markets,
clubs or other places
vi. During the exchange of information between extension workers and farmers through
using mobile phone (use of ICT).
Extension workers can note down the needs of farmers during field trips and meetings.
Important topics can be discussed during these meetings. The SAAO can ask farmers about
i.
Farmer's Information Need Assessment

their problems in these meetings and try to provide solutions to farmers’ issues. If the issues
are common, they will be included in yearly extension work scheme at the discretion of the
SAAO.
PRA is “a basket of techniques” by which the rural community can appraise and analyse their
overall condition. Information received by this approach can be used in planning
development activities. PRA technique is used to help farmers identify and analyse their
problems, challenges, opportunities and solutions. There are many techniques of PRA which
can be used based on the situation. Some of these have been described in Annex 3. The
techniques of PRA are:
i.
Problem Census
vi.
Daily routine
ii.
Geographical Map
vii. Seasonal Diagram
iii. Social Map
viii. Matrix ranking and matrix scoring
iv. Transect walks
ix.
Chapatti Diagram
v.
Wealth ranking
SAAOs have to follow individual or integrated techniques:
i.
Area Selection: Selecting a village or a farmer’s group or a club
ii.
Area Visit: Meeting local farmers while visiting the whole area
iii. Establishing relationships: SAAOs have to foster good relationship with the farmers
and explain their roles completely by discussing their life styles and farming issues to
ensure effective extension service delivery.
iv. Tool Selection: Selecting appropriate tools is important for PRA. Flip chart, paper,
marker pen, card, scissors, leaf, seed, sample crop and other locally available things
may be used.
Problem census (PC) is a PRA technique which is informal and participatory. It helps to analyse
overall local context, set work-plans and implement them. In fact, it is a discussion program
with groups where farmers can detect their problem and recommend solutions. The SAAO will
play the role of a moderator here. Every officer must conduct at least 4 PCs every year as per
7.4 Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA)
7.5 Problem Census

Step 1
Arranging a meeting
Arrange a meeting of 20-30 farmers with similar farm background.
Fix the date, time and place of meeting by discussing with farmers.
Inform the time-table in Upazila office.
Step 2
Explaining a topic
Discuss with farmers to fix a topic. Select a specific topic.
Step 3
Forming sub-group,
preparing problem list
Divide the farmers into sub-groups of 5 members each. Supply
paper and pens to every sub-group. Tell them to make a problem
list which they face most in relation to the topic.
Step 4
Discussing the
problems, conclusion
Gather the sub-groups to present their own list. Use the tally
mark for each problem; add all tally marks to make a master list.
Identify important five problems from the master list with the
help of farmers. Discuss for probable solution. Note the top five
problems in a diary. Explain that at least an activity will be
planned for this group.
Image 6: Steps of Problem Census
rule. Two PCs will be with small and marginal farmers (one with male farmers, the other with
female farmers; another two PCs will be with medium and large farmers (one with male
farmers, the other with female farmers). If problem census is not possible with large female
farmers, then SAAOs will communicate in person, identify and note down their problem in
diary.
PC should be completed within June before making yearly work-plans. All problems and their
importance should be written in a result sheet. For each group, five of the most important
problems with their descriptions and related extension work plans should be submitted to
the Upazila. To solve the problems, the following (Image 6) steps can be followed:
Farmer's Information need Assessment

The important matters to be considered in conducting PC are:
Participants should be from same socio-economic backgrounds; otherwise,
problems faced by all cannot be easily identified.
ii.
The activities of meeting should be conducted informally; it inspires farmers to
participate spontaneously.
iii. Subject matter should be explained categorically and clearly, otherwise
identifying problems will be difficult for farmers.
iv. If the farmers do not feel comfortable, they can draw general images to explain
their problems; farmers may tell the problems orally and the officer will write
down these.
v.
At the end of the event, the extension workers will explain the below to the farmers:
a. The DAE will use this information for promulgation of extension schemes.
b. Main five problems will be considered in Upazila Plan workshops and PC will be
included as an agenda in Upazila Agriculture Extension schemes.
c. SAAOs will meet farmers again for further topics to be discussed.
d. The results will be written in paper, a sample result sheet is given below:
Sample of Problem Solving Result
Upazila: ........... Block: .........
Village: Betila
Date: ..........
Deputy Agriculture Officer: ..............
Target Farmer’s Group:
Betila Farmer’s Group
Type of Group:
Vegetable producing farmer’s group
Subject:
Special problems regarding management of soil and fertilizer for
cucumber production
Problem
Number
Limited knowledge on effectiveness and use of TSP & MOP
IIII 4
No knowledge on organic fertilizer which increases soil fertility and productivity III 3
No knowledge on compost preparation
I 1
No knowledge on cultivation of ‘Dhaincha’ for green fertilizer
II 2
More information needed for classification of suitable cropping pattern
III 3
Knowledge needed on present status of fertility of soil
III 3
No knowledge on per hectare application of Urea fertilizer
II 2
No knowledge on top dressing of Urea fertilizer
III 3
i.

Participatory rural assessment enables farmers to participate in extension activities. This
procedure is preferred by DAE. Upazila Agriculture Officer will supervise overall activities of
the problem assessment and will ensure presence of at least one upazila level officer in one PC
program in every block.
Under special circumstances, extension workers are instructed to assess information-need of
farmers through formal survey methods such as using questionnaires. Although this helps to
get specific information on land size, crop cultivated, use of machinery, equipment costs etc.,
but farmers are not able to elaborately discuss or cannot exchange ideas.
The diary of SAAO is the main tool for time management and preservation of information. It is
an important part of extension activities because it is used during assessment of farmer’s
information-need, promulgation of plan, supervision and evaluation. A SAAO diary is used for
noting daily extension work, problems and needs of farmers. SAAOs will note down the
following information of farmers:
Visited place, person and farmers’ group
ii.
Problems faced by farmers
iii. Short description of given suggestions and measures taken
iv. The problems that could not be solved by SAAOs, which should be sent to Upazila
Officer
vi. List of solutions sent by Upazila Officer to the farmers
Meeting with various organizations such as Upazila Agricultural Technical Coordination
Committees (UTC) is a way of understanding information-need of farmers. UTC meeting is
participatory which takes place at least 3 times every year at the Upazila level. UTC has
become a participatory forum consisting of agriculture participants (Govt. and Non Govt.).
UTC enables all concerned local service providing organizations to exchange their thoughts,
information and resources. One of UTC meetings occurs before reviewing and finalising of
DAE’s annual and seasonal activities. Besides, at union, district, regional levels, through
discussion in agricultural technical coordination committees, there is a scope to assess
farmer’s information-needs regarding agricultural production related problems and solutions
7.6 Survey
7.6 Reviewing SAAO's Diary
7.7 Meeting and View-Exchange with Organizations Related to
Extension Services
i.
Farmer's Information need Assessment

The following opportunities are created through extension service providing organizations to
assess the needs of farmers:
i.
Extension service providing organisations are forums where various extension
participants can discuss the results of their own FINAs.
ii.
The results of FINAs of participant organization can be included in DAE’s extension
plans and these can be reviewed and examined.
iii. Presenting the work plan with members of different organizations and taking their
suggestions for improvements.
iv. Assess the probability of taking joint collaborations for problems which cannot be
solved by one organization.
Remote sensing is a technology by which we can know the condition of an area or a thing, even
from distance. Satellite based remote sensing allows capturing images which can be studied
to understand their status. It is possible to observe, examine, survey and monitor the organic
resources by using this technology. One advantage of remote sensing is collecting information
of very remote places and objects. By using the GIS technique, different agricultural
information such as soil, soil erosion etc. can be inferred. SPARSO and similar organizations
can help in this regard. Below are the uses of remote sensing:
With remote sensing, an opportunity has been created for regular collection of
information on weather based problems or prospects in agriculture. By knowing the
information about agriculture and weather, it becomes easier to fix what to-do by
farmers
ii.
It is used to understand different types of soil, use of land, hydrological matters,
drought, floods and crop harvesting
iii. It helps to examine crop fields, monitor diseases and infestation of insects and
provides warnings about disasters and how to take necessary measures
iv. It provides news regarding crop production can be inferred through observing the
growth of crops and damages of any kind
v.
It helps to take decision for assessing the amount of damage in any natural disaster,
and suggesting or helping the farmers accordingly
vi. It helps to take measures in the quickest time for preventing severe natural disasters
vii. It can be used in determining temperature of earth’s surface and sphere, radiation,
rain, humidity of soil, production of crops etc
viii. Thus by using the remote sensing technology, information about crops, soil, water,
weather etc. can be received easily and necessary measures can be taken more
effectively
7.9 Remote Sensing
i.

Making Extension Plans
Chapter

Making Extension Plans
8.1 Definition and Objectives of Planning
The Objectives of the extension plan is to formulate certain priorities for achieving a
particular goal within the pre-decided activities. Assessment of information-needs is a basis
for formulating the plan. Proper planning is needed to complete a task and to take
preparation to select and achieve goals and objectives on the basis of information-needs. The
plan increases the efficiency and effectiveness of the organisation. Planning helps taking
decisions and saves costs.
The plan can be compared to a map. The plan indicates when to start a job, when the job
should be done, who will do what job and when etc. Some conditions are also enforced in the
plan. As a result, achieving successful targets is possible by ensuring fair and disciplined
accountability within a specific time range.
a. Considering the time of the plan, there can be three types of plans:
i.
Short-term planning: The duration is usually 1 year or less
ii.
Medium-term planning: The duration of the term is usually 2 to 3 years (sometimes 5
years)
iii. Long-term plan: The expiry date is generally 5 years.
Short-term and mid-term plans are usually made In DAE.
b. Considering the administrative territory, three types of planning can be made in DAE:
i.
Can be made at the national level‒ macro planning,
ii.
Can be made at the regional or district levels‒ meso planning
iii. Can be at the local level‒ micro planning.
DAE extension programmes will focus more on meso and micro planning because‒
i.
Growing crops is not equal in all regions or districts of Bangladesh. DAE will adopt
agricultural development activities on the basis of the crop zoning. So, meso plan will
be accepted based on local compatibility to get more production certainty.
ii. In view of the increase in production and productivity, DAE is determined to provide
demand-based expansion services to the farmers, hence the micro-plan will be made
at the block level of the farmers; DAE will focus most on the micro-planning process.

8.2 Importance of DAE's Agricultural Extension Planning
8.3 Making of Extension Plans
DAE will always try to achieve its intended goals by formulating and implementing extension
plans for development process. The requirements of DAE's extension plans are summarized
as follows:
i.
Increasing the production and productivity of crops is an ongoing and progressive
development trend. In the development process - the primary and most important work
will be to make appropriate plans for the execution of extension activities properly
ii.
A special responsibility of the DAE to achieve targets by making production plans it is
the responsibility of DAE to make production plans in order to achieve its yearly
targets. The target will be determined based on the previous year as the base year, and
all extension programmes will be formulated for achieving the target
iii. The demand for extension technologies is different in different regions and among
various types of farmers. A bottom-up approach should be used to understand
information-needs of various farmers
iv. The extension plan will provide guidance for selecting and performing objective
oriented activities
v.
Extension plans will play roles in performing necessary tasks within the stipulated time
range
vi. It will be easier to follow the budget due to the extension plan
vii. The implementation of the programme will be possible within the prescribed time and
budget
viii. It will determine the basis for monitoring and evaluating the programme
ix. The implementation progress of the planned activities will be easily measurable
x.
Planning will enhance the skills of DAE in carrying out the activities and will help in
achieving quality work.
DAE will implement the expansion programme on the basis of prepared annual plans. Director
of Crops Wing will be especially responsible for coordinating and monitoring all the activities
related to planning and implementation of annual extension plans. Details of DAE's annual
extension plans are given below:
The fundamental basis for planning is to identify the problems and information demand of
farmer groups. The next stage of information need assessment is to formulate the master list
in relation to the information demand or problem. The details for the formulation of the
master list of problems are given below:
i.
Categorical problem identification of targeted farmer groups should be done as‒ small
and marginal women farmers, large and medium women farmers, small and marginal
male farmers, large and medium male farmers
ii.
Four separate master lists for the four categories with problems mentioned in the
problem census result sheet should be prepared.
8.3.1 Planning Annual Extension Programmes
Making Extension Plans

iii. All the problems should be recorded in classwise problem census result sheet and tally
mark should be used if the same problems are repeated
iv. If the result sheets of the problems of farmers under survey are tallies completely and
it the problems of every sheet is counted, it will be possible to know how many times
every problem is taking place and their importance
v.
Additional problems taken from the SAAO’s diary should be added to the master list
vi. Problems from Technology Extension Monitoring System (TEMS), KAP and any other
sources should be considered in the Master list
Identifying the extension programme activities based on the information or problems of
farmers, (Figure 7) is displayed:
8.3.1.1 Considerable Issues to Make Extension Programme Plans
i.
For the next financial year, the annual extension programmes will include activities of
three seasons, therefore the annual plans will have three parts namely:
Part-1 Kharif-II, Part-2 Robi, and Part-3 Kharif-I
ii.
The annual plans will include major extension activities, such as result demonstration,
method demonstration, motivational tours, field days, formal farmer trainings etc.
iii. The plan will include activities to achieve important and maximum number of
objectives as per the needs of the farmers
iv. Activities for every category of farmers will be added in the plans proportionally
v.
At least 30% of all activities will be for female farmers
vi. Planning will be cost effective
vii. The plan will include free follow-up activities.
Image 7: Outline of Extension Work Based on Farmer's Information-Need
Information need or
problems provided
by the farmer
Determine extension
activities to achieve the
desired objectives in
the programme plans
Selecting the
objective in the light
of similar problems
Integration of similar
problems from the
master list
Determine the
importance of the
problems in the
master list
Preparing master list
of problems

Selecting objectives of plans for Annual Extension Programmes is in Appendix 4 (A) and annual
extension programme planning formats is presented in Appendix 4 (b).
The primary and main responsibility of preparing the annual extension plans lies with Upazila
at the discretion of the Agricultural Extension Officer who will follow the instructions and
advices of the Upazila Agricultural Officers and Additional Agricultural Officers. Other officials
working in DAE at the Upazila will provide full support to this work.
8.3.1.2 Preparing of Intensive Extension Programme for Large Irrigation Projects or
Surface Water Irrigation Project Areas
Irrigation is an important step in crop production. There are several large irrigation projects in
Bangladesh, such as Chandpur Irrigation Project, Teesta Irrigation Project, and GK Irrigation
Project, rubber dam irrigation projects, BADC small irrigation projects etc. In these irrigation
projects, irrigation is done from surface water sources. The intensification of the crops will
increase by formulating a comprehensive extension programme for these large irrigation
projects or surface water irrigation project areas.
8.3.1.3 Preparing Suitable Extension Programmes for Southern Charland Drought
Prone Areas or Barind Tracks or Haor Areas or Hill Areas
Crop production technologies and management are different in areas like southern areas or
drought prone areas or barind tracks or haor areas or hill areas. There is a chance to increase
the production and productivity of these regions by applying location specific technologies.
On the basis of utility, separate extension programme plans for these areas will be formulated.
Making plans for these areas is the responsibility of the Additional Director of concerned
regions and the Deputy Director of concerned districts and the planning will be implemented
through the Crops Wing with the approval of the headquarter of the Agricultural Extension
Management Committee.
8.3.1.4 Steps or Work Details of Annual Extension Programmes and Finalization
S.N
Steps
Farmer information-needs
assessment
Job description
SAAOs will work with the farmers to identify the
problems and information-needs of farmers. Survey,
PCs, PRA, meeting etc. will be followed to identify the
problems and information-needs. SAAO’s diary will
also be used. Every SAAO will manage at least 4 PCs –
2 for small and marginal farmers (1 for male farmer
and 1 for female farmer) and 2 for with medium and
large farmers (1 for male farmer and 1 for female
Making Extension Plans

Processing and arranging of
information related to
planning and preparing
draft plans in the upazila
level
Approval in the meeting of
the Upazila Agricultural
Technical Coordination
Committee (UTC)
Approval of the meeting of
the District Agricultural
Technical Coordination
Committee (DTC)
Approval at the meeting of
the Regional Agricultural
Technical Coordination
Committee (RTC)
Review and Approval by
DAE (DAE Management
Committee) Headquarter
Notification in the meeting
of the National Agricultural
Technical Coordination
Committee (NATC)
farmers). Upazila officials will monitor the accuracy
of the work through proper monitoring.
Information-needs and problem sheets will be
separated based on the targeted farmer category at
the Upazila level and a master list formed with the
number or frequency of information-needs to
determine the importance of the problem, classify
the same problems to select the objectives, and
decide the extension programmes to achieve the
objectives and prepare a draft plan for the extension
programmes. Selected extension activities in the
draft plan will be verified and shared with different
stakeholders. Amend them if necessary.
In the meeting of the UTC, the details of the
information-needs and problems of the farmers, the
master list, the selected objectives, the extension
activities to achieve the objectives - and past, present
and future extension programmes will be reviewed.
The draft of the extension programme plans will be
approved subject to the necessary amendments.
Annual Extension Programmes approved in the
upazila will verifed, review and validate the technical
aspects of the plan.
The Annual Extension Programme approved in the
district will verify, review and authorize the technical
aspects of the plan and will send it to the Director of
Field Services Wing or the Director of Planning, Project
implementation and ICT wing and the Director of
selected extension programmes related project or
program DAE (Head Office).
Under the supervision of the Director General of DAE,
Director of all Wings and relevant officers of HQ in
coordination will be authorized to review and monitor
the plans of Annual Extension Programmes of upazilas
sent from the region and will be approved.
The approved plans in the DAE Headquarters will be
notified in NATC meeting for technical verification
and for cooperation in implementation
S.N
Steps
Job Description

Extension Program Plan
Review
Project / Programme
Director
The annual extension programme is planned long
before the crop season. During implementation, it is
often seen that new ideas have developed and new
technologies that are in line with the needs of the
farmers have not been included in the annual extension
programmes; but it is important to implement them. In
this case, the necessary amendments may be made in
accordance with the approval of the district and region
of DAE and of DTC and RTC.
The project or programme Director will release the
money at the appropriate time to implement
permitted planned activities.
Free and follow-up activities will be implemented
through motivation.
*** participation of partner organization in all sectors needs to be ensured.
S.N
Steps
Job Description
Making Extension Plans
S.N
Step of work
Farmers’ Information-Needs Assessment
Preparation of information processing and
planning at the upazila levelUpazila
Agricultural Technical Committee meeting
Verification of the plan prepared by
Upazila in the district
District Agricultural Technical Committee
meeting
Regional level plan verification
Regional Technical Committee meeting
Review and approval of planning at
headquarters
Presented at the National Technical
Committee
Approved and final planning from
headquarter to upazila
Funding for implementation of the
programme
Responsibility
SAAO
UAO
UAO
DD
DD
AD
AD
Director, Crops
Wing
DG
Director, Crops
Wing
Project Director,
related projects
Duration of planning and
finalization
Year-long, April-June (peak)
17th July-7th August
August 10th
16 August - 28 August
August 30th
2 September-12 September
15th September
20 September-
28 September
30 September
15th December
Rabi - 15th September
Kharip 1 - 28 February,
Kharif May 2 - 30
8.3.1.5 Road Map for Planning and Finalizing Annual Extension Programme Plans

8.3.2 Annual Production Plans of DAE
Work on preparation of annual production plans from block, upazila, district, regions and
national levels will be started. The plan will be provided from the DAE Crops Wing. Production
plans include:
i.
A list of productive and effective extension technologies used in the seasons
ii.
The cultivation and production targets of all seasonal field crops, cash crops, horticultural
crops and of all the cultivated crops in the homesteads (in the light of the past year)
iii. Strategies and production management to achieve goals
iv. Crop cultivation calendar
v.
Demand, supply and management of inputs
vi. Condition of the use of the irrigation and cultivable areas under irrigation
vii. Proper use of groundwater for irrigation, emphasizing the use of surface irrigation
water, efficient irrigation management, and supplementary irrigation management
viii. New and potential crops such as flowers, high value crops cultivation extension plans
and action strategies
ix. Crop diversification strategies
x.
Gardening on roof tops in urban areas
xi. Special crop management and environment friendly management in backward areas
and natural disaster prone areas
xii. Crops and production techniques suitable for areas or regions
xiii. Monitoring system etc.
8.3.2.1 Steps to Make Annual Production Plan
The first step of making annual production plans will start from the block. The following
activities should be taken by the SAAO in the first step:
i.
SAAOs will be aware of the past 4/5 years of block information and will get ideas about
their next year's needs and objectives by interviewing representative farmers
ii.
SAAOs will make a draft of possible production plans for the coming year by adjusting
the previous year's information, the overall situation of the current year and next
year's demand and objectives.
iii. Draft plans will be shared with the relevant senior officials of the block and finalized by
making necessary changes
iv.
Then the production plan will be submitted to the office of the Upazila Agricultural
Officer.

Upazila plans will be made by justifying, updating and consolidating the plans of the blocks,
District plans will be made by justifying, updating and consolidating the plans of the Upazila.
Regional plan will be made by justifying, updating and consolidating the plans of the District and
National plans will be made by justifying, updating and consolidating the plans of the regions.
The national level production plans will be finalized by consulting in the inter-departmental
meetings and the project will be approved and it is subject to amendments to the region,
district, upazila and block level plans.
It is to be noted, the annual production plan will be presented at the meeting of the Upazila or
District or Region or National level Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee, so that the
work of making of the upazila or district or region or national level plan will be completed by
coordinating with the date of the meeting of the Technical Coordination Committee.
8.3.2.2 Road Map for makeing and Finalisation of DAE's Annual Production Plans
Review and Approval
September 28
28th
30th September
Office name
Block level
Upazila level
District level
Region level
DAE
Management
Committee
Discussion on
NATCC in
national level
Crops Wing
Duration of making
plan (every year)
July 1 July 15
17 July 7th August
16 August 28
August
2 September 12
September
-
-
-
-
Planned
submission
(per year)
Upazila Office,
July 16th
District Office,
August 15th
Region Offices,
September 2
Crops Wing, 20
September
Robi
-
10 th August
30 th August
15th
September
-
30th
September
The final and approved plans are notified within November 30 In the
region or district or upazila levels
Kharif I
-
15th
January
30th
January
15th
February
-
1st March
Kharif II
-
15th
May
30th May
15th June
-
25th June
Technical Coordination Committee
meeting duration
Making Extension Plans

8.4 Planning of Annual Performance Agreement (APA)
Steps have been taken to achieve development goals based on the annual performance
agreement In order to implement the Vision 2021 through the increase in institutional
efficiency of government departments or organizations, strengthening transparency and
accountability, good governance consolidation and assuring wealth.
The Annual Performance Agreement for the Department or Agencies for the year 2016-17 is
given in Appendix 5 (a), the annual performance agreement for the field level offices is given in
Appendix 5 (b) and format of the Annual Performance Agreement 2015-2016 is in Appendix 5 (c).
DAE's block, upazila, district, region and national level officials will make plans of APA for the
next financial year in the appropriate form following related principles.
Departmental works will be performed according to the APA and the Wings of the DAE will be
responsible for achieving the target of the APA in their respective areas.
The steps for making the annual production plans as described in section 8.3.2.1 of this
chapter will be followed in the preparation of Annual Performance Agreement plans
Annual Performance Agreement plans will be presented in the meeting of the Upazila /
District or Region or National level Agricultural Technical Coordination Committees, so that
the work of planning will be completed by coordinating with the date of the meeting of
Technical Coordination Committee.
8.4.1 Road Map for making and Finalizing of Annual Performance Agreement
Office name
Block Level
Upazila Level
District level
Regional Level
DAE Management
Committee
Discussion on NATCC in
national level
Crops Wing
Duration of making
plan (every year)
1 December 30 December
1 January
January
16 January 28 January
2 February 12 February
-
-
-
Plan submission
(per year)
Upazila Office,
1 January
District Office,
12th January
Region Offices,
2 February
Crops Wing,
20th February
Technical Coordination
Committee Meeting
(Kharif 1)
-
15th January
30th January
15th February
Review and Approval 28th February
-
1st March
1st March
The final and approved plans of the district or district
upazila level are notified within 30th of March
-

8.5 Planning for the Development of Human Resources Connected
to Agricultural Extension Work
8.6 Input Management Plans
8.7 Making the Project Plans of the Department of Extension
8.8 Risk Management Planning
DAE’s large workforce provides services for the implementation of extension activities. The
need to provide effective, efficient and fruitful services is to improve the skill of these large
population or extension workers. DAE's Training Wing will make a training plan for the
development of the skills of extension workers.
Provide the necessary inputs for the successful implementation of the extension plan. DAE's
concerned wing will make annual plans for managing seed, fertilizer, etc. and inform the input
providers. Input suppliers will prepare and supply the inputs accordingly. DAE makes annual
plans for fertilizer management. This plan is made by the SAAO on the basis of the demand for
farmers' crop and seasonal fertilizers for the block. In the plan, the monthly demand or
allocation of fertilizer is given in every upazila. Fertilizer is supplied monthly according to the
allocated division, the management process is easy and sufficient. DAE will make similar plans
for each input.
DAE’s extension activities are efficiently taken to the farmers. Directors of Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT Wing of DAE play a role in planning and finalizing projects.
Directors of Planning, Project Implementation and ICT Wing will prepare all DAE projects
based on identified information-needs of farmers to ensure extension services responding to
farmers’ demands.
It is important to keep in mind that extension approaches of all the projects are similar and
apply the same “Revised Extension Approach” as work strategies otherwise the farmers can
be confused due to different types of work strategies in different projects and it can hamper
the mobility of the total extension management.
Almost all activities face unexpected risk. So, whatever the plan may be, there is a possibility
of a sudden risk its implementation. Risk management programmes will also be included in
to any project plan of DAE. Risk management plans can be different depending on the
Making Extension Plans

context. In the context of Bangladesh, examples of two types of risk management plans are
mentioned below:
1. Risk Avoidance: For example, cultivation of short-duration rice varieties (BRRIdhan 28)
instead of long-duration rice varieties (BRRI 29) by using high yielding rice cultivation
technology methods can avoid the risk of advance or early floods.
2. Risk Mitigation: For example, ensuring cultivation of long-duration rice BRRIdhan 29 in
flood prone areas by flood control embankment.

Human Resource
Development
Chapter

9.1 Introduction
9.2 Importance of Training in Agricultural Extension
Extension workers should have relevant knowledge and skills to enhance capacity of
providing responsive service as per the needs of extension service receivers. Therefore, it is
mandatory for the Department of Agricultural Extension to give special importance to
enhance the capacity of the extension workers.
In all spheres of DAE, it is necessary to train up the extension workers to enhance their
knowledge, skills and capacity. The aim of training is to increase their range of knowledge and
skill and nurture their expected attitude so that they can utilize their learning practically.
With a view to responding to the multi-purpose learning-need of farmers, it is necessary to
perform multi-dimensional extension activities. There are locally responsive extension
activities in different areas of every district and upazila for which extension workers need
special knowledge and skills. These activities might have different approaches from area to
area, that is why, it is the responsibility of concerned Deputy Director of the areas to develop
skills of extension workers, and the responsibility of Upazila Agriculture Officers to develop
the skills of Sub-assistant Agriculture Officers.
So, one of the agenda of DAE is to regularly develop its human resources.
Some special ways of human resource development are:
i.
Training
ii.
Self-driven Learning
iii. Coaching and Mentoring
iv. Employee Promotion
v.
Job Enrichment
vi. Job Rotation and Cross-training
vii. Lateral Moves
viii. Job Aids
In agriculture extension, the importance of training is high. New technologies in agriculture
are being invented through agricultural research. Extension workers need to gain knowledge
Human Resource Development

on new technologies and their usage and spread the knowledge among the farmers. Thus,
development of agriculture will take place. Training is necessary in agricultural extension.
i.
Newly appointed extension workers do not have practical experience and skills. So,
they must undergo induction training about organizations, duties and responsibilities,
management etc.
ii.
It is necessary to update knowledge and skill related to production technologies
iii. Training is necessary to learn the application or utility of newly invented agricultural
technics
iv. Depending on current contexts, some special trainings are getting priority, such as
flower cultivation, fruit production, cultivating mushroom, roof top gardening, farm
mechanization, commercial agriculture, conservation of soil fertility, producing safe
food crops and agriculture adaptation technic in case of climate change challenge
v.
To fulfil the demand of time, attaining competence on updated extension work model
and approach, such as knowledge capacity on e-extension service
vi. As part of extension plans, it is to be assured that the extension workers are skilled in
choosing work-plans and carrying out responsibilities
vii. To work with farmers, extension workers need training about village culture,
traditions, customs, rural social systems and land management
viii. Extension workers need training the methods that are used for motivation or
providing training to the farmers, about how to implement method demonstration,
and result demonstration, how to conduct meeting and how to observe field day, etc.
ix. A trained extension worker can contribute in determining accurate amount of
fertilizer, irrigation, agriculture loan, etc. and by strong or efficient management, can
prevent wastage and thus help in productivity.
x.
Through training, mutual co-operation between farmers and extension workers
develop; so extension service becomes credible to farmers and workers can work with
farmers easily
xi. Because of regular training, communication between extension workers and farmers
increases and mutual interaction takes place
xii. The responsibility of trained extension workers increases towards farmers
xiii. Agriculture often faces natural calamities, so concerned people need training to face
natural calamities
The importance of training is as follows:
Human Resource Development

xiv. It is a special duty of agriculture extension service to prepare extension plans. That is
why training is necessary for launching human resources in extension planning
xv. It is very necessary to train up the extension workers on lows of learning, learning,
motivation and training strategies as they will be able to extend their experience on
improved technologies among the farmers.
xvi. Extension workers need special training to evaluate the effectiveness of extension
work and project activities
xvii.Farmer’s training is necessary for developing need based technological knowledge,
skills and attitudes.
Choosing the perfect training method is necessary for training activities. If one training
method is not effective to achieve objectives of the training, then other methods can be used.
The approach of the training depends on the context.
The utility of training methods largely depends on the capacity of trainers. Usually in
extension organizations, the following training methods are used:
Lecture
Group-Discussion
Conference
Workshop
Assignment
TV or VDO Clip or Cinema
Role Playing
Management Game.
Competence is an individual’s level of knowledge, skill and experience for completing a
certain task. People have different degrees of competence to accomplish different kinds of
work. A person might not be competent for everything. Overall competence of a person is
usually related to the opportunities they have to learn new skills and to use their existing skills.
The indicators of competence in DAE are:
a.
Technical knowledge and skills in agriculture
b.
Knowledge and skills related to agriculture extension
c.
Knowledge and skills related to management
9.3 Training Methods
9.4 Assessing the Competence of Extension Workers
Competence of Extension Workers

Value
Level of Competence
Skilled
Fully competent
Almost competent
Moderately
competent
Partially competent
Not competent
Gaps
None
No need to supervise
Supervision needed
Need some assistance and
directions/ guidance
Lack of important
knowledge and skill
Cannot accomplish task, no
clear knowledge or skill
Necessity of Training
None
Can exercise without supervision
Can exercise if supervision is done, on-thejob training is needed
On-the-job training is needed and selfdriven learning is necessary
On-the-job training and self-driven learning,
specific training activities are necessary
Full training course is needed
Assessment of competence level and area of training need can be done in the following ways:
i.
Job Analysis
ii.
Performance Appraisal
iii. Check List Method
iv. Observation
v.
Group Discussion
For this assessment one or more suitable procedures can be followed.
Annual Competence Assessment Form
a.
The level of competence of workers and the area of training needs can be realized
easily with a comparison against job analysis
b.
For assessing the level of competence, all extension workers will fill up the annual
competence assessment form in appendix 6
c.
Completed form will be analysed and reviewed by District Training Officer and Upazila
Agriculture Officer and will be saved in computer so that they can be quickly reviewed
and evaluated
d.
Collected information through the annual competence assessment form will be used
in upazila and zilla for making a database; based on the database, the area of extension
plans and training need will be assessed.
Table 4. Level of Competence of Extension Workers
178 Human Resource Development

Workers competence database relevant for the works:
i.
To determine the competence level of workers while implementing extension activities
ii.
To determine the area of training demand of workers
iii. To confer the works as deserved by the worker
iv. To identify the activities that can be implemented for having the related competence
of workers.
The best way of increasing the skill of extensions workers is the training activities
i.
All extension workers should constantly increase their competence in existing and new
knowledge and skill are as continuously
ii.
Training is important for providing correct and appropriate extension suggestions
iii.
Extension workers are responsible for increasing his own knowledge and skills and it should be
an integral part of daily routines to extract knowledge from experience
v.
Formal training is the most effective means for capacity development, but it is not cost saving
v.
SAAOs will discuss with their supervisors regarding demand of training; such a suggestion
assists to determine the subject of formal training
vi.
The responsibility of the management authority is to help officers learn the subordinate in
various ways.
Training in workplace or on-the-job training
Self-directed Learning
Informal Training
Formal Training
i.
Training in workplace is to train a subordinate by the supervisor as part of the
supervision of a particular work or mentoring.
ii.
It is a common way of enhancing competence level in workplace
iii. In this method, the supervisor instructs the subordinates to complete their works in a
proper way
iv. Practising task in presence of a-“mentor” provides opportunities for improving one’s
capacity
v.
Training in workplace is a two-way process that is why employees have to seek
suggestions from the supervisors and the supervisors in turn have to understand
which suggestion are needed for workers
9.5 Increasing the Competence of Extension Workers
Some Means for Increasing Competence Level of Extension Workers
1. Training in Workplace or On-the-Job Training

vi. This type of training is common for DAE and supervisors are doing it regularly, such as
giving advices for implementing demonstration in plots in better way or suggesting
about writing of SAAO’s diary accurately
Self-directed learning is a primary way of capacity development for extension workers of all
levels. In this regard, a worker is him or herself responsible for being aware of modern
knowledge and for exploring answers to their own questions. To cope up with advancement of
technologies and changes, self-directed learning is the best method.
i.
Using the learning centres of districts and upazila
ii.
Using the libraries of headquarters
iii. Practising with technology related publications in various projects of the headquarter
iv. The quickest means of getting information is to discussion the problem and ask for
solution with professionals (high officials or colleagues), experienced farmers, NGO
workers, businessmen or any knowledgeable person
v.
By reading agricultural newspapers or periodicals, books, journals, magazines and
other learning materials, a worker can gain knowledge
vi. Reading and collecting information by using internet, mobile apps and other ICT tools
vii. Watching and listening to programmes on televisions and in radios
viii. Visiting agricultural research centres
ix. Joining suitable training courses of any NGO in own areas
x.
Personal practice and conducting one’s own experiments or trials
xi. Joining any group that tries to solve common problems.
The concerned manager of headquarter at district and upazila levels will ensure for all
extension workers sufficient resources and opportunities for self-directed learning.
a.
This training is to provide any information or demonstrate techniques to any team of
workers who have gathered for some other purposes
b.
When extension workers attend any meeting, chances of informal training are created
Example of informal training is given below:
i.
Discussing problem of productions and their solutions
ii.
Suggesting the workers about the controlling method of insects
2. Self-Directed Learning
Various Ways for Individuals for Self-directed Learning:
3. Informal Training
180 Human Resource Development

iii. Making farmers get acquainted with any new technology
iv. Informing workers about new methods of marketing
v.
Displaying an agricultural equipment.
On-the-job training and supervised practice, self-directed learning and informal trainings are
the low-cost or no-cost ways to significantly develop the competence of extension workers.
A formal training is most a effective means to develop competence levels, but it is not cost
saving. The nature of formal training activities is:
a.
Presenting prepared lessons and exercising skills
b.
Formal training is expensive, if any significant lack is found regarding knowledge or skill
of many workers, then formal training is appropriate
c.
Fortnightly training of SAAOs on extension messages is a regular formal activity; it will
be conducted at a low cost or free.
d.
Prepared lessons and training materials, handouts are needed for formal trainings
e.
In a for maltraining which is conducted in project cost as part of development project
scheme, the training activities will be determined as per the objective of project.
i.
Training wing finances and manages official trainings centrally
ii.
Course may take place centrally or direction can be placed to regions or districts to
arrange less training locally
iii. Training guide or manual, materials, finance etc. are supplied generally from the
headquarter
iv. Training can take place in research organization, National Agricultural Training
Academy or in any other training centre.
i.
Formal training may take place for Upazila officers as per direction of the headquarter
ii.
This training is also arranged as part of any particular development project
iii. Regular monthly training on extension messages and other technical matters takes
place at alow or without cost.
4. Formal Training
Formal Training of District Officers
Formal Training of Upazila Officers

iv. Apart from the official training directed by the headquarter, every district authority
can arrange their own training course for its subordinate officers.
i.
The regular formal training for Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officers will be held once in
every fortnight (14 days) at upazila
ii
Regular monthly training on extension messages and other technical matters takes
place in alow or without cost
iii. SAAOs will discuss with supervisors about training needs; such suggestions will help
determine the subject matter of formal training
iv. Vocational or technical training can be arranged in district or Upazila offices, research
organisation, ATI, NATA or in any other official organisation.
To meet the food demand of the increasing population, DAE is helping farmers by transferring
technologies though several activities to increase productivity production and productivity.
For this, DAE is giving special importance to develop human resources by considering demand
of farmers, different policies related to agriculture and national priority.
Training Wing will carry out overall responsibility regarding development of human resources
or training activities. Other wings and projects will provide necessary assistance. The
department will take the following measures:
a.
Preparing and implementing, reviewing and evaluating overall plans regarding
capacity development of human resources of DAE
b.
Promulgating a yearly training plan for the extension workers of all levels in the light of
training demand list from regions and districts
c.
Including all determined training activities for various projects of DAE in yearly training
plans
d.
Publishing training manuals and guides centrally
e.
Taking necessary help in relevant fields from Field services Wing and other Wings
f.
Ensuring monitoring and evaluation of the fortnightly training activities of SAAOs to be
held at Upazila levels by Training Wing and Field Services Wing of the headquarter
g.
Taking initiatives to collect, preserve records of all training activities, make a yearly
report and to prepare a training database by using ICT of the training wing
Training of Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officers
9.6 Role of DAE Headquarter in Developing Human Resources
182 Human Resource Development

h.
Arranging an induction training course after first appointment
i.
Arranging technical subjective training for Agricultural Extension Officers with the
help of their own property of DAE or research organization
j.
Arranging seminars on e-extension service, impacts and adaptation of the change of
climate, flower cultivation, fruit cultivation, safe production, commercial farming, firm
mechanizing, town gradens, roof cultivation, marketing, etc.
k.
To ensure quality standard of any matter related training, arrangement of ToT course
for trainers
l.
Making a standard training module on particular topics and ensuring training on them
m. Selecting appropriate participants for the training arranged by various research
organizations
n.
Creating opportunities for ensuring higher degree to develop professional knowledge
and capacity of workers
o.
Arranging a foreign training or an excursion or study tour
p.
Updating the syllabus or curricula of an agriculture diploma course
q.
Encouraging and increasing the use and scope of a self-directed learning
r.
Communicating with various research organisations such as NATA and other training
centres
s.
Arranging workshops or seminars on various issues.
As part of developing human resources, it is an important duty of DAE to arrange training for
farmers (male and female) so that they can increase profitable crop production and their
incomes by using improved farming systems.
i.
Training wing will promulgate a yearly farmer’s training plan
ii.
All training activities for farmers under determined projects of DAE shall be included in
to yearly farmer’s training plan
iii. Training wing shall take initiatives to collect record of farmer’s training (male &
female), preserve and make an annual report and will take measures to prepare
database containing information of farmer’s training at all levels.
The monthly training session and other formal trainings of upazila level officers take place in the
district office. The deputy director will select the component of the training programme at the
district level and will oversee overall management duties. He will distribute the duties of every
competent task to appropriate persons for the training activities of districts. But the sole
mentorship of training programme will be in the hand of the district training officer.
9.7 Training Management at District Levels

District Training Officer will Ensure
Matters Considered in District Training Activities
Regular Monthly Training of Upazila Level Officers at District Offices
extension planning processes
ii.
Extension programme plans should be determined in accordance with the SAAOs’
fortnightly training time and subject matters
iii. Arranging suitable training materials and encouraging all extension workers in the
process of on the job training and self-directed learning.
Before every season, the District Training Officer will discuss with Additional Deputy Director
and Upazila Officers about the finalization of training activities. If external help is needed to
implement the training activity, that needs to be identified, such as to find places of training,
guest speakers, equipments and training materials etc.
i.
In all training activities, the training procedure and guidelines of DAE must be followed
ii.
Ensuring the training session guide such as- objectives, subjects, training method and
preparation of list of participants
iii. Training of trainers and at every level training activities should be closely monitored
and supervised
iv. Reviewing and evaluating training activities.
i.
Monthly training of upazila level officers will be in district and District Training Officers
and Additional Deputy Directors will conduct the sessions
ii.
In the training, for fortnightly training session of SAAOs, the appropriate extension
messages (impact points) related to improved agricultural technologies for next two
weeks must be included
iii. At the second half of the day, any other determined learning matters, current issues or
the technical solution of field problems may be included as an opportunity of informal
training
iv. All Upazila Agricultural Extension Officers and Additional Agricultural Officers in
district will participate in monthly trainings
v.
In training materials, real objects and live samples must be included and these should
be exhibited during training session
vi. At the training session, various modern audio-visual quipments including multimedia
presentation will be used.
i.
Determination of the training need should be in combination with bottom-up
184 Human Resource Development

vii. At the district level, before monthly training programme, the subject matters of
extension messages and draft of prepared lessons sent from upazila will be finalized by
District Training Officers and Additional Deputy Directors after certain amendments or
corrections and will be sent at the upazila before the fortnightly training of SAAOs
viii. The timing of the monthly training of upazila level officers will be finalized by
Additional Director of the region in consultation with the concerned deputy director.
All the information of training at district levels has to be recorded and preserved in the register
and training related database preparation should be followed. Deputy Director will regularly
(monthly) send all information of districts and upazila level trainings to the Additional Director
of the area. For all extension workers of districts, a letter for necessary trainings will to be sent
within September every year to the Director of Training Wing. In a district training demand
letter, the subject matters of the training, adjectives, time limit, its number of trainees,
proposed time for arrangement of training, etc. should be mentioned.
The upazila training unit is the primary level of conducting all kind of formal or informal training
activities. Upazila Agriculture Officer will carry overall duties for fruitful training management
by using local facilities. This requires the best use of existing facilities.
The fundamental requirements of upazila training units are-
a.
Arrangement of suitable training place
b.
Suitable sitting arrangement (U-shaped)
c.
Suitable light arrangement
d.
Facilities to use information booklets and other composed materials
e.
Arrangement for preservation of training equipments
f.
Arrangement of training related equipments such as multimedia projectors, flip
boards, white boards etc. and necessary audio-visuals.
i.
Conducting regular fortnightly trainings for Sub-AssistantAgriculture Officers
ii.
Preparing topics and lesson-sheets of extension messages for trainings considering
extension program related matters, timely and local needs, weather information, land
suitability of crops (crop zoning), production constraints, training needs of SAAO, etc.
9.8 Training Management at the Upazila Level
Activities Related to Training at the Upazila Level

iii. Assessing training needs for SAAO's and for all officers or staffs of Upazila levels;
assessing training needs of farmers is also another duty
iv.
Every year within July, assessing the training needs, mentioning the subject matter of
training, number of trainees, training time etc. to sent the report of training needs to
district offices
v.
Adjusting training needs in extension plans
vi. Registering all descriptions of upazila training activities (day, date, subject, presence
etc.) and making a computer database
vii. Submitting periodicals and the monthly reports of all training information in district
office.
i.
Providing training on agricultural practices which are recommended and suitable for
the block
ii.
Giving training on any newly invented technology
iii. Developing agriculture related knowledge and skills of SAAO's through regular
trainings so that their capacity for suggesting the farmers in responding to the
information needs for crop production and other subjects
iv. Developing capacity of SAAOs to analyse the problems of farmers, understand the
benefits of recommended farm practices, and to demonstrate those in the field
v.
Enhancing SAAOs’ competence to implement extension activities as per plans
vi. Enhancing capacity of SAAOs in using communication technics and alternative
extension methods so that they can intimately work with the farmers
vii. Reviewing present condition of the field, such as- problems of farmers, infestation of
insects and diseases, work to do on availability of equipments and providing technical
and departmental directions.
i.
Upazila Agriculture Officer is responsible for fortnightly training of SAAOs
ii.
Agriculture Extension Officer will act as principal trainer, but if needed the research
organization, BADC of other organisation’s officers will be invited
iii. To ensure the quality of training, an officer of the district office will be present in the
training session for supervision
iv. Main part of the training will be to present the prepared lessons of approved training
messages
v.
The guidelines of formal training programmes such as- fixed time table, lesson
presentation, evaluation etc. are to be followed in fortnightly trainings at upazila
Purpose of Training Activities of Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officer
Management of Fortnightly Training for Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officers
186 Human Resource Development

vi. Practical trainings can be arranged in local research centres or at BADC farms,
Horticulture Centres, or farmers’ fields
vii. There must have arrangements for exhibiting read objects or live samples; SAAO's and
SAAPO's will collect and bring live samples of infestation and other problems and read
objects
viii. The presentation must be attractive by using multimedia and other electronic media
ix. Training sessions should be participatory and arranging performing exercises
x.
Composed copies of prepared extension messages need to be distributed to SAAO's
xi. Arrangement of evaluation of effectiveness of training must be there at the end of the
session
xii. After the training session, general technical discussions will be made there, where
SAAOs can ask for different suggestions and officers will provide technical directions
xiii. SAAOs can help the upazila officers by informing training needs to formulate
fortnightly training plans.
An extension worker has to acquire various knowledge and skills to complete demand based
work for field levels. Self-directed learning plays a vital role here. In this learning, every extension
worker should have access to use the learning resource centre. In every district and upazila, there
should be development and extension of the learning centre. The duties of district and upazila
level officers will be the collection, preservation and proper management of books, pamphlets,
samples of documents in their own learning centres.
In alearning resource centre, creating scopes for identifying diseases and insects will be there and
scopes of using necessary equipments will be there. The learning centre will be suitable for using
as a museum.
The learning centre will have the following resource materials, such as
i.
Books, booklets and leaflets
ii.
Training materials
iii. Technical reports
iv. Newspapers, agriculture magazines (krishikatha) and periodicals
v.
Samples of harmful and beneficial insects
vi. Samples of seeds end plant parts
vii. Samples of various agricultural inputs
viii. Part of diseases affected plants
ix. Pots and other products for sample preservation
9.9 Learning Resource Centres at the District and Upazila Level

x.
Primary inputs and equipments for disease identification, such as magnifying glass,
microscope, glass slides, glycerine etc.
xi. Graphs, posters etc.
xii. Computer disks with audio and video
xiii. Scopes of ICT using.
i.
Agriculture research organizations and Agriculture Information Services
ii.
DAE wings
iii. Development Projects
iv. Donor organisations connected to DAE and other extension partners
v.
NGO and other extension organiZations
vi. Suppliers of agricultural equipments and inputs
There are many other sources of materials and information. Officers will look for useful items
or information regularly.
The notable points for management of district learning centres are:
i.
Taking suitable care of learning materials at the centre so that the users may have easy
access to necessary the materials
ii.
There will be a separate room for a learning centres at district offices. The room will
contain collected books and furniture for keeping materials, easily movable, books
and other materials
iii. District training officers will act as officer-in-charge, he will buy necessary materials
and will check time to time the utility of existing materials and necessity of new
materials
iv. An office assistant will be appointed to help the district training officer for learning
centre management
v.
Received learning materials from any source will be noted in a permanent register by
the office assistant. There will be one distribution register. District training officers or
other officers will sign during receipt and delivery of materials
vi. After having receipt the assistant will give an index number at every book and will keep
those in almirah or rack through catalogue
vii. A list of all learning materials of the centre will be hung in the room, so that visitors can
easily see the available materials in the centre
Primary sources of Various References and Materials for Using in Training Activities
and in Learning Resource Centres
Management of District Learning Centres
188 Human Resource Development

viii. The assistant will provide certain books and other materials as per the user’s request
and will keep in proper places after getting back
ix. The assistant will be careful enough and if any problem occurs, he will inform the duty
officer.
The learning resource materials should be kept in an affixed room at upazila offices. These
should be kept in such places where visitors will not disturb the officers. Like the district office,
in the upazila office, there should be an officer to look after the learning centre and the similar
controlling system will be there. Learning centres can be set up at unions or block levels with
the help of upazila. The responsibility of management of learning centre will be carried by
Sub-Assistant Agriculture Officer.
All level workers of districts and upazilas, specially the SAAOs should be inspired for full use of
learning centres. Some ways to encourage are
i.
To advice that use of a learning centre is an indicator of self-directed learning for
continually increasing their overall of knowledge and skill
ii.
Ensure that all workers are aware of existing learning materials
iii. Informing the workers about the use of a learning centre
iv. The learning centre will open and close on time
v.
Ensure that workers can use the learning resource centre during the office time
vi. Monitoring the centre and taking measures to publicize about the centre
vii. Keeping the environment of the resource centre, pleasant.
Learning centres can provide important contributions for all level extension workers to
enhance continually the knowledge and skill. Increasing the collection of learning centres and
updating, efforts should be taken to create interest of workers for using more learning
materials for self-directed learning.
To ensure desired work, there should have supply of supplementary materials, property and
finances. There should be appointment or promotion of officers and staffs at all levels of DAE.
Extension officers by using necessary property can provide fruitful service and as a result the
aim of the department will be easily fulfilled. For areas, districts or block levels, the necessary
property and equipment are listed below:
Management of Upazila Learning Centres
Use of Upazila and District Learning Resource Centre
9.10 Assets Needed at DAE Field Offices to Ensure Standard Services

Regional Level
District Levels
Upazila Levels
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. Multimedia Projectors, Screens, Pico Projectors and related products
iv. A generator or a solar system
v.
Laptops for additional director or deputy director each
vi. More than one desktop and printer for official work
vii. Internet connection facility
viii. A scanner, a photocopier, a camera
ix. Necessary number of display boards
x.
Necessary furniture and other materials for conducting various trainings.
i.
Suitable infrastructure and necessary furniture
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. Multimedia Projectors, Screens, Pico Projectors and related products
iv. Almirahs, Book shelves, Display boards, furniture, tools and necessary resources
v.
A generator or a solar system
vi. Laptops for Deputy Director, District Training Officer and Additional Deputy Director
each
vii. More than one desktop and printer for official work
viii. Internet connection facility
ix. A scanner, a photocopier, a camera
x.
Necessary amount of display boards
xi. Necessary amount of furniture and other materials for conducting various training.
i.
Suitable infrastructure and necessary furniture
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. A generator or a solar system
iv. Laptops for every officer
v.
More than one desktop and printer for official work
vi. Internet connection facility.
i.
Suitable infrastructure and necessary furniture
190 Human Resource Development

vii. A scanner, a photocopier, a camera
viii. Necessary amount of display boards
ix. Necessary amount of furniture and other materials for conducting various trainings.
x.
Almirahs, book shelves, display boards, furniture for the training centres.
i.
Necessary office furniture chairs, tables and Almirahs
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. Almirahs, book shelves, display boards, furniture for learning centres
i.
Suitable infrastructure and necessary furniture
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. A generator or a solar system
iv. Computers, photocopiers, multimedia projectors, Pico projectors and other related
equipments
v.
A scanner, a photocopier, a camera.
i.
Suitable infrastructure and necessary furniture
ii.
Necessary vehicles
iii. Computers, photocopiers, multimedia projectors, screens, pico projectors and other
related equipments
iv. A generator or a solar system
v.
A scanner, a photocopier, a camera.
i.
Managers should encourage workers to improve their overall competence through
continuously acquiring relevant knowledge and skills.
Block Level
ATI (Agriculture Training Institute)
Horticulture Centre
9.11 Encouraging Extension Workers for Skill Development and
Conducting Evaluation

ii.
Supervisors will take action to measure the capacity development level of extension
workers in terms as low, medium and high
iii. Everybody will be accountable and responsible for self-skill and ability development
iv. Self-skill and ability development effort will be considered an important part of
performance evaluation
v.
Every worker either single or with partners will regularly exercise his or her training or
learning activities and will keep sharing discussions with the supervisor or colleagues
vi. Supervisors will evaluate improvement of competence level of subordinate extension
workers regularly based on performance appraisal including other different indicators
vii. Additional Director of a region will monitor training activities of all levels under his
supervision and will perform the technical audit as well
viii. Supervisors will inspire more extension to acquire more knowledge and skill and will
take effective measures suitable for them.
192 Human Resource Development

Selecting
Extension Methods
Chapter

10.1 Introduction
10.2 Individual Extension Methods
One of the principles of the ‘revised extension approach’ of the Department of Agricultural
Extension is the use of a wide range of extension methods. According to various data and
statistics, farmers depend highly on peer farmers, while input dealers come in second and
agricultural extension workers come in third places respectively. Thus in order to increase
the agricultural knowledge and skills of the farmers and input dealers, and to earn the
farmers’ trust on accepting extension service, it is very important to choose an appropriate
method of extension.
In most of methods that the Department of Agricultural Extension uses, farmer's group or
organizations are included directly; and printed media as well as audio or visual aids are used
to strengthen the group or organization based extension events. The department currently
doesn’t emphasise on individual extension methods; however, it might prove effective in
certain cases. A summary of the various methods used for extension is given below:
i.
Individual extension methods
ii.
Farmer’s group or organization-based methods
iii. Mass media and audio-visual aids.
DAE’s principle is to work with farmer's groups however it can be quite useful to hold personal
visits of individual farmers or farm-families. The main objective of a personal visit is to
practically identify and analyse the main problems a farmer or a family faces, and choosing
the most acceptable procedure to face them.
Individual visits might be necessary in cases such as:
i.
If a farmer or a farm-family requests advice on a particular problem
ii.
If the extension worker needs to determine a particular problem of an individual
farmer in a particular area
iii. To raise awareness among farmers the worker has previously visited and to motivate
their active participation in extension programmes
iv. If workers wish to introduce themselves with a certain farm or farm-family
v.
For a extension worker to learn about a new farm, or gain knowledge about on-farm
research conducted by a particular farmer
Selecting Extension Methods

vi.
management.
Regardless of the purpose of the visit, it is necessary to properly complete the whole range of
activities. Farmers may need further explanation and information regarding a specific new
practice, and it might need to show them how to do it through demonstration. Farmers may
request technical information that field workers don’t have.
Personal visit sallow the field workers to present the agriculture policies of the government,
discuss the current market system and supply information about the agricultural activities of
the area. Some visits may be held urgently where it is needed to provide instant advice (such
as about disease and insect-pest infestation or diseases of plants.
Personal visit also enables the worker to develop relationship with the other members of the
farm-families. Different members might have different understandings and perceptions
about problems and their possible solutions. Field workers should encourage all the family
members to participate. This can increase the opportunity of women and youth to be actively
involved in the local extension programmes.
Personal visit can be an important way to build a friendly relationship with local farmers and
earn their trust and loyalty to the extension service. However, making an effective individual
method and planning, arranging and implementing them are time consuming for reaching
larger numbers of farmers. Individual visit is an expensive extension method and should be
planned with care. The reason for personal visit must be justifiable. Field workers should also be
careful not to visit the same farmer repeatedly, since it can limit the effect of the extension
programme and create feelings of dissatisfaction among the other farmers. They might think the
extension programme has nothing to offer them or that they are being neglected deliberately.
For planning a proper individual visit, the following checklist might be used:
i.
Decide the time of visit if possible
ii.
Determine the purpose of the visit
iii. Analyse data regarding previous visits
iv. Prepare the technical information that might be needed
v.
Include the proposed visit into the programme scheme.
If the extension worker and a farmer need to discuss the overall farming plan and
1. Before the Visit
Selecting Extension Methods

2. During the Visit
3. After the Visit
i.
ii.
Approach the farmer and his family with a friendly attitude
iii. Ask questions regarding the farm
iv. Listen to the farmer’s problems as well as his opinions regarding how to solve them
v.
Explain the technical information or advice clearly and see if the farmer has
understood them. Note down the problems the solutions of which you don’t know and
send them to superiors or colleagues
vi. Discuss the activities that are progressing well
vii. Write down notes regarding the farm and the visit
viii. Decide the date and purpose of the next activity and visit (if needed) together.
i.
Check and ensure that the data collected from the visit are accurate
ii.
Make arrangements for the follow-up activity
iii. Decide the date of the next visit and include it in the next work programme.
During the visit, field workers must speak in a language that everyone understands. For this,
the SAAO must be a good listener as well as a good speaker. The farmers need to be
encouraged to share their problems in their own words. The SAAO should ask the farmers
suitable questions that would let him understand them. It is likely that many of the benefits of
the visit will be lost if the discussions and conclusions are not written down.
The collected information should be noted down in a diary. The important points are:
i.
Date of the visit
ii.
Purpose of the visit
iii. Conclusions that have been agreed upon
iv. Other information or comments that the field worker might like to add.
It’s important for the workers to take steps regarding the problems that could not be solved
during the visit. They must not discourage or disappoint the farmers; otherwise the farmers
could potentially lose trust in the services DAE provides. It takes years to build trust and
reliability, and the field workers must protect them. If the worker agrees on another visit with the
farmer, it should be written down in the SAAO diary and included in the concerned work
programme.
Be punctual and talk with the farm-family in ordinary attire

10.3 Adopting New Technologies
Choosing what to do, when to do and how to do in a farm are complicated
decisions.
Some decisions are made based on information collected from the Department of
Agricultural Extension. The process to decide whether to accept new thoughts and ideas is
called the ‘adoption process.’
There are five commonly acknowledged steps of the adoption process as follows:
i.
Increasing awareness of new ideas by constantly accumulating knowledge about new things
ii.
Interest or Persuasion
Seeking further information, forming and changing attitude towards accepting new ideas
iii. Evaluation and Decision
Collecting information in details and making judgement whether to try or reject an idea
iv. Adoption or confirmation
Reaching a decision for applying new ideas comprehensively replacing old ones
v.
Reinforcement
Collecting additional information about the success of adopting the new technology
affirming the validity of the decision
Local extension workers have the responsibility of choosing any method to adopt in local extension
projects. The worker should select the most efficient method. The steps of the acceptance process
play an important role. A worker can use some certain standards. These would be:
i.
Expense: Choosing a method which is cost-effective and can be implemented through
a planned budget, reducing the expense.
ii.
Extent: Choosing a group extension method that can reach a large number of farmers.
iii. Complication: Choosing an easy method which won’t require a large number of
equipment or consume a lot of time to plan and implement.
iv. Skills: If the extension workers do not possess the necessary skills to choose or
implement a method, training might be needed.
v.
vi. Participation: Choosing a method that will enable the farmers to participate in
learning process.
i.
The message
ii. The participants
to make
Awareness or knowledge
Targeting: Choosing methods that are particularly well-suited for specific types of farmers.
Other Standards of Selecting a Method
Choosing a Method Depends on
198 Selecting Extension Methods

Available resources and
iv. Complementary elements
The extension method must be appropriate with regards to the topic or message it aims to
spread. For example, the method for mango grafting might be best shown to a group of
farmers through a visual demonstration.
The extension method must be appropriate for the farmers or participants. For example,
conducting a method of demonstration might be best suited for female farmers.
The extension method must be cost effective. Hiring necessary equipment or re-using the
same things might help lessen costs.
Regardless of the method used, it must complement other extension methods. For example,
exhibitions and field days complement each other, using visual aids for formal training days
complement each other as well.
iii.
The Message
The Participants
Available Resources
Complementation

Extension Methods
Based on
Farmer's Groups or Organisations
Chapter

One of the principles of the ‘Revised Extension Approach’ that the Department of Agricultural
Extension (DAE) follows is to work with farmer's group or farmer’s organisations. The benefit
of that is it allows the extension service to reach a large number of farmers at the same time.
One of the conditions to provide the service in an efficient and effective way is to select and
use the appropriate extension method. The following should be considered while selecting a
suitable method for extension eventswith a farmer group or organisation:
i.
The method should create effective interaction between the workers and farmers
ii.
The method should be cost effective
iii. The method should allow a large number of farmers to efficiently participate at the
same time in the extension event
iv. The method should be direct and practical
v.
The method should be easily understandable, appealing and technologically appropriate.
It is sufficient to use just one method for spreading the extension technology or message;
however in some cases it is necessary to use more than one method for meeting a certain
purpose. Whether to use more than one method depends on the type of the message
intended to be disseminated.
Pre-planning and proper implementation of the extension method determine its true success
and worth. Proper monitoring, evaluation and follow-up can help determine the level of
success of each method, which can be helpful for determining methods in future. Therefore,
the extension workers must put sincere effort to monitor, evaluate and follow-up after
implementation of the extension method. The concerned higher authorities also must strictly
oversee the procedure.
Group extension methods are at the centre of all the extension approaches of DAE.
A short description of the potential extension methods to use for farmers’ groups or
organizations is given hereby:
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's
Groups or Organizations
1. Demonstration
1.1 Result Demonstration
1.2 Method Demonstration
2. Field days
7. Folk media
8. Meetings with farmers' groups or
organization members (Group meetings)
9. Yard meetings
10. Farmers’ conversations

11.1 Demonstration
Holding demonstration is a convenient way to transfer technologies and encourage trying out
new ideas among farmers. Usually the technology or topic is chosen according to the context
and based on the farmers’ information-needs. The benefits of technology transfer through
demonstrations are:
This method is very efficient for places where people are mostly illiterate
ii.
The medium of learning, observing and doing through demonstrations is the best
media for transfer of technology
iii. Farmers can adopt to it easily through this method
iv. It is one of the good ways of integrated approaches
V.
It fosters increased trust between extension workers and farmers
vi. Builds leadership
vii. Helps to build a positive relationship between extension workers and farmers
viii. Lowers the cost of technology transfer.
ix. Can be of assistance during farmer assemblies and field days' work.
i.
Relatively time-consuming
ii.
Dependent on the skills of the extension workers
iii. May face risk in any season (excessive rainfall or shortage of rain or flood or draught).
Result demonstration showcases the results of applying a certain technology in a field.
Depending on the problems and demands of the farmers, DAE encourages various types of
result demonstrations. These include:
i.
Cropping pattern demonstration
ii. Block demonstration
iii. Single season demonstration
iv. Single technology demonstration
v. Package demonstration.
i.
Limitations
Result Demonstration
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations
3. District or upazila agricultural fair
4. Farm walks
5. Farmers’ rallies
6. Motivational tours
11. Krishi Ziggasha
12. Participatory technology development
13. Formal training days
14. Farmers' Field School

Cropping Pattern Demonstration:
Block Demonstration:
Single Season Demonstration:
Single Technology Demonstration:
Package Demonstration:
Using the Upazila Plan:
Selecting Demonstration Site:
This demonstration is carried out during three different
seasons of the year. It exhibits crop sequence on a certain piece of land throughout the year.
Example: cultivating Aman rice in Kharif-II season, Pulse oilseed Boro rice in Rabi season and
Dhaincha in Kharif-I season. This type of demonstration is useful for teaching how to integrate
and adapt to a new crop into their farm management (cropping pattern helps increase the
fertility of soil).
Block demonstration is a large demonstration conducted in a farm.
This demonstration is planned and carried out with a group of farmers who cultivate lands
situated side-by-side. This demonstration can be a cropping pattern demonstration, a single
season demonstration, a single technology demonstration or a package demonstration by
nature.

This demonstration usually shows only one particular side of
producing crops. Single season demonstrations last for only one season of the year such as
Kharif-II, Rabi or Kharif-I.
This type of demonstration compares a new technology
with the current technologies farmers use. A single technology demonstration contains two
plots, one is a control plot (variety or fertilizer or irrigation or pest and disease management)
which is a plot of farmers, and the other is the demonstration plot. There is to be only one
difference between the two plots. This is a demonstration that serves the purpose of clearly
demonstrating the benefits of a certain change.
This demonstration is usually conducted to introduce a new crop to a
farming area. This showcases information about when to cultivate a variety of crop, how much
fertilizer should be used and when, what method to be used for irrigation, how to control pest
infestation and diseases, and other aspects regarding producing the crops.
Planning a result demonstration might concern a combination of these aspects:
Using upazila plans
ii.
Selecting a demonstration site
iii. Planning a necessary inputs
iv. Training farmers.
The time and the types of demonstration to be conducted are decided
during upazila planning workshop. This planning determines and chooses the best
demonstration to be held from among single season demonstrations or cropping patterns,
block demonstrations or single technology demonstrations. Then it proceeds to decide the
schedule of the demonstration chosen.
The site of the demonstration should be easily visible and easily
accessible, and should be situated on a representative land. The farmers chosen for the
Planning
i.

demonstration should be representatives of targeted groups or organisations, who have
determined their needs or problems and have interest. In case of a individual farmer
exhibition, the farmer chosen must be a member of the main group or organisation with the
demand or problem to solve.
Plans for necessary materials are made depending on the
size of the plot and technology used. A signboard should be present containing the purpose of
the demonstration, description of the technology and the schedule of the field day.
The farmer moderating the demonstration is trained regarding the purpose
and motivation behind the demonstration, what it aims to gain, and how to implement it.
The necessary training and inputs should be provided to the farmers on the
same day before setting the demonstration. To ensure successful implementation, a number
of actions are to be taken after the demonstration is set. These are:
Regularly inspecting the demonstration plot and meeting the farmer moderating it
ii.
Regularly holding extension programme of the group or organisation on the
demonstration site
iii. Preserving the data of the demonstration, keeping a written record of inputs, the
application method, time of usage, problems, solutions and results in a register
iv. Monitoring and evaluating the demonstration.
The method demonstration is a group extension method that may last one to two hours. This
method demonstrates a certain skill step by step and helps the participants practise them.
This method is participatory and enables farmer to learn through working practically.
The topic of method demonstration should be determined based on the farmers’ needs or
problems. The topics should be defined by consulting the farmers and the work should be
analysed after reaching a point of agreement on a certain topic.
Once the analysis is done, a suitable time and place should be chosen. This should be done by
consulting with the farmers’ group or organisation, and the date and time should be
convenient to the farmers while the venue should be nearby to their houses.
The check-list of the method demonstration should contain the following:
i.
Determining demands or problems and defining the topics for the method
demonstration
ii.
Evaluating the current knowledge of the farmers as well as conducting the analysis of
the work through consulting them
Planning the Necessary Materials:
Farmer Training:
Implementing:
i.
Method Demonstration
Planning
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Choosing a suitable venue- field or house as well as a date and time
iv. Demonstrating and practising the work
v.
Collecting necessary materials (multimedia, flip chart, live samples, machines, pens
and paper etc.)
vi. Training and briefing the farmers who will assist in demonstrating the method
vii. Visiting the location chosen as the venue beforehand to ensure it is appropriate to
hold the programme.
The extension worker is the one responsible for managing the demonstration, so he or she
must arrive at the venue beforehand with necessary materials and ensure everything goes
smoothly. A successful implementation of the method demonstration needs:
i.
A formal environment where farmers can ask their questions comfortably
ii.
A proper explanation of the purpose of the method demonstration
iii. Discussion about how to use the training materials
iv. Demonstrating methods accordingly to the task analysis
v.
A detailed explanation about every step of the important learning points
vii. Making a briefing at the end of the programme
vii. Giving farmers time to practise the method
viii. Providing encouragement and boosting self-confidence of every participant to apply
the method in his or her own farm or homestead.
A field day is a group extension method that’s held on the venue of result demonstration. On
field days, a large number of farmers are given the opportunity to visit the demonstration
venue, learn the technology that’s being demonstrate and ask questions regarding it, as well
as testing it out by applying it in his or her own farm. A number of continuous field days create
an opportunity for farmers, especially the ones who attend demonstrations that last a year
such as cropping pattern demonstrations, to gather the farmers again.
Arranging field days on particular times during the demonstration, such time when certain
management practices are done, or time that clearly showcases the benefits of
demonstration. Field days should be held 3 or 4 times for demonstrating crop production.
iii.
Implementation
Planning
11.2 Field Day

During sowing or planting the crops
ii.
When fertilizers or other inputs are applied
iii. In the midst of the season when the difference of growth of the crops can be seen vividly
iv.
During harvesting and threshing crops when the harvest, cost and profit can be compared.
It is advised for field days to be held 2-3 times for seasonal demonstrations. Cropping pattern
demonstrations require three successive seasons, so it is advised to hold two field days per
season and therefore, six field days in total in a year.
The date and time of a field day must be decided beforehand and made known to the
neighbouring farmers. The number of participating farmers should not be larger than 20-25. A
small group would have a better opportunity to observe closely and listen to the explanations
properly from fellow farmers and extension workers. To improve the quality of the field day,
multimedia, audio-visual aids or printed materials should be used as much as possible. The
check-list of a proper plan for successfully implementing a field day should contain:
i.
Deciding a suitable date and time through discussing the farmers conducting the
demonstration
ii.
Collecting the equipment that might be necessary
iii. Advertising news of the field day to neighbouring farmers and farmers who have
participated in such events before, and bring farmers from the same socio-economic
backgrounds if possible
vi. Ensuring that the farmers conducting the demonstration can properly demonstrate
and explain the purpose of the demonstration, how it was carried out, the expected
profit, cost and harvest, etc.
v.
Assuring the convenience of transport as well as freely moving around in the field, and
clear visibility for the field day by inspecting the demonstration plot beforehand
vi. Open discussions regarding technologies are necessary to be held on the field day, and
megaphone may be used if needed.
SAAO or other extension workers in charge should arrive with all necessary materials
beforehand and ensure that everything is progressing without a problem. For implementing a
successful field day, the following are needed:
i.
Creating a formal environment that lets people ask questions comfortably and explain
to farmers that the demonstration was established on the basis of their main
demands.
ii.
The farmer conducting the demonstration should be encouraged to play an active role
in explaining the purpose of the demonstration, what has been done in it, and
expressing their opinions the benefits and cost of the technology.
iii. Ways should be arranged for the farmers to thoroughly walk around the
demonstration and watch the harvest closely. Farmers should be encouraged to
observe the difference between a demonstration plot and a control plot if present.
i.
Implementation
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Extension workers should hold a former discussion with farmers on if they have clearly
understood the themes of the demonstration, their thoughts about the technologies
and whether they would like to test them out in their own farms or not.
v.
Names and phone numbers of the participants should be kept written.
To create awareness about improved technologies among a large number of people within a
short time and increase interest in agricultural and rural development by holding fairs is a
useful method. Fairs play a valuable role in strengthening relationship amongst participants
(partners) engaged in the extension work. A fair lets farmers observe various technologies
presented by research institutes, private organisations, other government organisations,
dealers who provide inputs, nursery owners, etc.; and hold informal lively discussions.
For planning, Upazila Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (UTC), Upazila Parishad
Coordination Committee and District Agricultural Technical Coordination Committee (DTC)
should hold discussions so that everyone can share their thoughts. Planning for the fair should
include the following actions:
i.
Discussing the topics, schedules and management materials in meetings held by
various committees
ii.
Distributing duties amongst each participating extension organisation
iii. Inviting NGOs, input supply companies or dealers, nursery owners, fruit merchants,
etc. to set up demonstration stalls
iv. Finalizing physical layout of the venue, setting up stalls, objects to be exhibited,
arrangements to exhibit the technologies and other objects, organizing opening and
ending ceremonies and arranging for awards etc.
v.
Ensuring wide publicity within districts and upazillas, for example: using mikes locally,
publishing advertisement in newspapers, using personal contact and social media,
putting up posters, and airing the news through dish cables and local radios.
vi. Collecting high quality vegetables, flowers, fruits, fruit-bearing plants and agricultural
commodities for demonstration from various areas of the district and upazilas
vii. Making arrangements to exhibit technologies developed by local farmers
viii. Selecting high quality technologies that local farmers can relate to carefully through
consulting with other extension workers, and making arrangements to properly
exhibit them in the fair
ix. Arranging awards and awarding ceremonies
x.
Showing multimedia, documentaries and making instruction sheets and leaflets
enough to distribute among the participants on shown or exhibited technologies.
iv.
11.3 District or Upazila Fair
Planning

Implementation
Planning
There are no specific rules or formats to arrange a fair. This should be planned and carried out
as a combined effort by cooperating with other extension service providers locally. These fairs
usually last for three to seven days. It is important to take sincere care of the objects exhibited
so that they can appeal to the farmers.
The appeal of the fair depends on the width of extent it can reach; thus, it needs mass
publicity. It would be a good idea to invite journalists and make a short briefing to give them
beforehand. For example, the authority of the district and the upazilla could wish to spread a
certain technology, or articles could be published about the farmers who have shown talent
and played an important role in the fair through newspapers or television, web portals,
websites and social medias.
A farm walks is an occasion when a group of farmers visit a farm and walk around it to observe
it. The host farmer and the extension workers should accompany them during the time.
The purposes of touring a farm could be:
Creating an opportunity to observe how a neighbouring farmer tests or adopts a new
technology
ii.
Creating an opportunity to see technologies developed by neighbouring farmers
iii. Making a way to analyse a farming system and determining opportunities for
improvement
iv. It is a useful supplementary way to the problem census regarding farmers participation
in the FINA process and one of the techniques of of PRA.
v.
Providing the farmers with an opportunity to reach an agreement regarding how to
tackle a certain problem or how to carry out plans on new technologies in groups or
organisations.
The plan to walk a farm could include the following:
i.
Determining the appropriate purpose, topic and place
ii.
Making a walk to the location beforehand to ensure the place is appropriate and easily
accessible via transport
iii. Making sure that the farmers of the farm to be visited are prepared and able to explain
their farm management such as problems, advantages, innovating and adopting new
technologies etc.
iv. Deciding the date and time by discussing with the participating farmers and agreeing
to a meeting point to gather and start the walk together.
11.4 Farm Walks
i.
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Implementation
Planning
SAAO should arrive in the selected place with necessary materials and equipment. Successful
implementation should include the following issues:
Creating a proper environment where people can ask questions comfortably
ii.
Explaining purposes of the walk and reminding farmers of the main topic of the walk
iii. Briefly explain which road to use to access to the farm, and introduce the farmer who
has cultivated and who would lead the participants
iv. During the walk, proper explanation of the problems of farmers running the farm, the
privileges they enjoy, the new technologies developed or tested or adopted, etc. must
be ensured
v.
Keeping a written record of the names and phone numbers of the farmers
vi. Briefing the main points learned at the end of the walk.
A farmer rally is a large extension event that features a combination of extension activities
centring a main topic. These should be held only to introduce successful technologies.
Farmer rallies can be held outside like a large field day. Since it is a single event with a
combination of a variety of extension activities, it should be planned very carefully; however,
this event will allow other extension service providers to work together. Some of the ideas for
planning a successful farmers’ rally is given below:
i.
Agreeing to a certain work schedule such as: opening, presentation, performance of
folk songs, presentation of participants, performing a folk drama, and award
ceremony.
ii.
Selecting and making supporting materials (such as banners, leaflets)
iii. Selecting the venue carefully so it that a large number of people can sit, and decorate
attractively. It should also be easily accessible to the farmers participating
iv. Once finalised the date and the venue should be publicized. Putting up and
distributing posters, cablesTV, radios etc. can serve as medias, and DAE may invite
farmer groups to participate
v.
Partner organisations should be made involved where possible; this would allow the
experiences and the assets to be shared for use.
i.
11.5 Farmer Rallies

Implementation
Planning
There are no specific rules for arranging farmer rallies. However, the following might be taken
into consideration:
Considering time necessary to set up, arrange and decorate the venue and making
arrangements for people to sit
ii.
Ensuring that each participating organisation knows the schedule of the programme
and their individual duties
iii. Test out if all the hired machines and equipment are in working condition.
Folk media are atraditional form of entertainment from ancient times and a media of
communication throughout the country. This can convey agricultural information through
entertainment in a simple way, encourage discussions on local issues among farmers and make
the extension events enjoyable. Folk medias are:
i.
Gambheera, Poth songs
ii.
Jaari songs, Shaari songs, Bhawaiya, Bhatiali, Baul songs, Murshidi, Ghetu songs
iii. Jaatra (local stage dramas), Pathonatak (street dramas)
iv. Telling stories
v.
Dance, puppet dance, 3D animation.
These methods are comparatively less expensive and useful, especially in areas where the
rate of literacy is low. Folk media can be fun and enjoyable for both farmers and extension
workers. These can also be appealing to the people of radio and television, So journalists could
be invited to the programme.
A short folk media event can convey a message about an important local issue to a large
audience in a short time. The topics can be use of organic matter, gardening in homesteads,
production and use of seeds, etc. The following steps should be considered:
Deciding the Type of Folk Media to Be Use: The type of media to use should depend on the
taste of the local people. Gambheera songs, which are a type of song that conveys educational
message through musical dramas; other songs or drama's could be used in various ways in
extension programmes.
Selecting Actors and Actresses: Having decided the type of media, the next step is to select
actors and actresses. For example for Manipuri Cultural Academy in Kamalganj thana of
Moulvibazar district, Gambheera group of Chapai Nawabganj district, etc. Other areas also
have this kind of groups that could be contracted to perform in the programmes. Assistance
could also be requested to Upazila Art Academy and Upazila Information Office.
i.
11.6 Folk Media
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Making a Story: The main point of planning the programme is making the script for the
Gambheera song or the drama. This script would direct actors and actresses about what to say
and when to say it. The script shouldn’t be too long and detailed and should cover one or two
topics. New technologies of agriculture should be presented through the script on social
background, however it should be carried out carefully so that the dramatic elements cannot
overshadow agricultural elements.
Planning Physical Logistics: A proper time, date and place should be arranged and made
known to the concerned authority. The venue should be an open place in a village or a small
bazar. The acting should be short and to the point.
Publicity: Using cable TVS, community radios, local newspapers, posters, mikes, and leaflets,
etc, would be good ways to invite farmers to the programme.
Once the script has been made, the programme can be announced, people can be invited and
the concerned local authority can be informed of the programme being held. The arrangers of
the programme could use the following advice:
i.
Arriving beforehand and ensuring that everything is going right, necessary equipments
and materials are ready, and actors and actresses are present.
This would be creating an opportunity for farmers and extension workers to get together and
hold discussions and analyses on new technologies or ideas. Groups can be separated into two
fundamental categories
Small Group Meetings: Small group or organisation meetings usually do not contain more
than 20 members. These members are usually members of permanent groups, or temporary
groups made based on mutual interest on a certain agricultural topic. Only one extension
worker attends this type of meetings.
Large Group or Social Meetings: A number of extension workers and members of the local
society would be involved in a meeting of this type. These meetings are very useful to convey
urgent messages or valuable information and can be publicised through using mikes or
putting up posters.
Meetings can serve various purposes, such as:
i.
Information Meetings: Farmers attend the meetings to receive important news or
information from the extension workers.
Implementation
11.7 Meetings with Members of Farmers’ Groups or Organizations

Planning Meetings: Extension workers and farmers discuss a certain problem and
decide on a possible solution and work plan together
iii. Groups of Particular Interest: Farmers who share common interests gather together
and discuss certain topics with the help of extension workers and learn about the
topics discussed.
Meetings are an ancient media; however, they are still serving their purposes usefully.
Extension researchers speak of 05 (five) types of meetings:
Temporary meetings that cover specific topics
ii.
Planned meetings
iii. Training meetings
iv. Discussion meetings on special procedures
v.
Public meetings called by social communities.
i.
An extension worker must not show an attitude that implies he or she can offer correct
solutions to every problem
ii.
Old methods of a certain area should not be negatively criticised while introducing a
new technology
iii. The worker must not treat pre-taken decisions as absolutely correct and force people
to accept them
iv. Even if the extension work seems to have already failed from the beginning, the
worker must not give up or lose patience.
The topics and sizes of the discussion should be decided based on the demands or the
problems the farmers face. These include:
i.
Working together with existing farmers’ groups or organizations where possible
ii.
Establishing partnership with other organizations that have related or approved
farmers’ groups or organizations of their own
iii. Working with permanent as well as temporary farmers’ organizations
iv. Working with group members who come from the same socio-economical
background and share the same interest
Three fundamental matters should be considered while arranging a training session or meeting
with a farmers’ group or organization. They are the size of the group or organization, formality
and balance.
ii.
i.
Discussion Guidelines
Planning
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Size
Formality
Balance or Equality
Implementation
Large meetings achieve less of their aims and manage to meet a very small portion of the
demand of the participants and comparatively small groups serve better. By rules, having
more than 20-30 people in a team can create a lot of problems, however this also depends on
the situation.
Group meetings are successful when held in a formal way under relaxed rules and regulations.
The extension workers in group meetings must ensure that everyone has the same
opportunity to participate. If the meeting is extremely formal, it needs a chairperson, a
discussion list and a formal description of work plans, especially when written decision on a
certain topic is needed. While working with existing groups, for example, working with a
group related to a private organization, it should be kept in mind that the group might have
their own rules and regulations regarding meetings and they should be followed.

Balance should be kept during the meeting through presentation, discussion, providing
information and encouraging participation.
To achieve the intended aim, group meetings should be lively, participation-based and openspirited. Lecture-based discussions might bore people.
Necessary Topics to Plan Group Meetings
i.
Ensuring that every member has agreed on the necessity of the group meeting and
why it has arisen
ii.
Inviting a small number of people who come from the same background and share the
same interest or has already joined a group
iii. Agreeing to a date, time and place acceptable to the farmers.
The following should be followed to hold a successful meeting:
i.
Creating a proper environment where participants feel comfortable to ask questions
ii.
Sitting arrangement- the best way might be sitting in a circle on a carpet outside the
house, this will let the participants see each other properly.

Explaining the purpose of the meeting and reminding the farmers of the main problem
or demand for the discussion
iv. Not prolonging it too much, one or two hours should be enough.
The extension worker can encourage farmers to regularly participate in meetings to discuss
certain topics of their interest during the cropping season.
Building a group under a Village-Based Farmers’ Organisation
Village-based farmer's organisation is a model that lets a large number of farmers gather
together and carry cooperation-based activities.
i.
Ensuring the best use of the limited asset available by building Village-Based
Organisations (VBO) and help farmers become independent
ii.
Ensuring the highest possible income, safety of food and nutrition by crop diversification,
cultivating fruits and planting vegetable gardens on yards of houses and schools
iii. Setting a correct market connection between the producer and the receiver of the food
iv. Helping the farmers increase their income by learning more about value addition,
processing and post-harvesting management of agricultural goods.
Various village organisation-based activities can be carried out aiming to improve the socioeconomic status of the village people living in poverty. Building village-based organisations
through the participation of all farmers of the village, setting principles, constitutions of the
organisations, and electing a management committee must be done.
The shares and savings of the members of the organisation will build organisation fund. It will be
treated as a rotating fund, and will grant loans as investments for income-generating activities
such as producing crops, processing and distributing them, farming animals and fish, etc. and
loans will be granted based on the applications of VBO members and decisions of the
management committee. The management committee will bear the responsibility of giving the
money, collecting the money and keeping account. This system will let the members living in
extreme poverty increase their share and income by taking loans from the rotating farm and
investing into income-generating activities. The Department of Agricultural Extension would
conduct motivating tours, hold workshops, farmer field schools, various trainings,
demonstrations on crop diversification and high-priced crops, provide equipment, build various
seller groups on village levels to distribute products in the market and make connections to small
scale and large-scale buyers.
iii.
Purposes
Strategy
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

An agricultural library could be set up in the village, which would provide various kinds of books
on agriculture, leaflets, folders and other publications as well as regular agricultural magazines
and local daily newspapers. Free evening school might be arranged with the help of local schoolcollege students for the illiterate farmers. Notices on agricultural ‘dos’ and ‘don’ts’ issued from
the DAE and the government at various points and other publications regarding useful advices on
agriculture should be put up on the notice board of the library regularly.
A group on rice or cereal crops could be set up by gathering the farmers sharing mutual
interest in areas with potential for rice or cereal crops producing. Similarly, vegetable
cultivating farmers’ group can be formed with farmers who share interest in cultivating
vegetables using the portion of village with the potential to grow vegetables; and fruits
cultivating farmers’ groups could be formed in the same way.
DAE should play necessary roles to register the village-based organisations
ii.
The organisations should be managed and known as DAE’s own groups
iii. The members of the farmers’ organisations should be given priority to access the
privileges and benefits, assistance with material providing, opportunities to receive
training,etc, gained from various projects.
iv. Involvement of DAE in regular meetings and issuing work plans should be ensured
v.
Opportunities to build connection with other organisations should be created
vi. Annual reports should be issued
vii. The organisations should have shares and savings
viii. DAE should help the planning for production and distribution in market as well as
providing follow-up for implementing it
ix. The organisations should be involved in income-generating activities or businesses
x.
The organisations should be strengthened to be involved in marketing management
xi. Transparency and show-cause within the organisation should be ensured.
When the time comes, the farmers of the villages of every block in every Upazila unites into
organisations, gain knowledge and skills to learn about new and modern technologies and
take correct decisions through the use of agricultural libraries and united agricultural
equipments; farmers will hold the key to control their own fates. The brokers and the
merchants will lose their hold over them and the cooperation based agricultural production
and the marketing system will be possible to build, which will help the farmers earn the
fair price.
Types of Farmers’ Groups
Actions to Be Taken
i.

11.8 Yard Meetings
11.9 Farmers’ Clubs
11.10 Inquiring about Agriculture or Krishi Ziggasha
11.11 Motivational Tours
Yard meetings can play an important role in agricultural extension activities. This allows:
Open discussions to be held with the farmers in a homely environment of the house
yard
ii.
The farmers may overcome their shyness and fear to the higher-ups
iii. Farmers can have a better opportunity to express their thoughts
iv. Agricultural problems on grassroot levels can be determined
Farmers’club programmes could be introduced for members of the civil society, social
representatives, journalists of print and electronic media and other concerned people at
upazila, district and regional levels. This could discuss topics such as gardening on the roof,
farming honey bees, cultivating safe vegetables and fruits by organic methods in the
homestead, good agricultural management, vermicomposting, pheromone traps, NPV,
trichoderma harziana, organic pesticides, irrigation methods, nutrition, etc.
Inquiry programmes about agriculture could be introduced among the students of schools,
colleges and madrasa’s for spreading modern agricultural technologies. If the programme is
held on a certain day every month by discussing with the head teacher or principal, the
students’ need of knowledge about modern agricultural technologies would be fulfilled.
The motivational tour stands for a group of up to 30 interested members being taken to visit a
different place or research institute from their own village or block. Usually motivational tours
last for a day. It lets the farmers see the new technologies used or developments made by
farmers of a different area or technologies developed in research centres, garden nurseries or
activities that other extension organisations have carried out. NGOs help showcasing them to
farmers of other areas through motivational tours. This tour creates a good opportunity for
exchanging thoughts and ideas among farmers of different areas.
The topics of motivational tours are decided based on the problems farmers face and the
needs they have for information. Once the topic is determined, the extension workers can
search for data and source of data.
i.
Planning
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

The following plan check-list can be used for a motivational tour:
Deciding the Technical Content and Place for the Tour: There shouldn’t be too many
topics or places decided for the tour. If a programme contains a small number of topics
and places, it enables the participants to observe, learn, practice and test out new
technologies much more efficiently.
ii.
If Involved with any Research Organisation Involved: In that case the plan should be
made accordingly by consulting them, through contacting them via letters, telephones
or mobile phones or directly visiting them regularly.
iii. If Farmers of other Areas are Involved, the Formal Plan Should be Made After
Discussing with Them: for example visiting them, keeping in contact with them
through the local extension worker and ensuring that they are able and prepared to
show their farms to the touring farmers.
iv. Visiting the Venue of the Programme Beforehand: Ensuring that the location of the
programme is appropriate and easily accessible via transport, getting familiar with the
local situations and meeting other farmers who might be involved.
v.
Deciding the Route, Day, Time and Timeline of the Tour: Making sure that the day and
time is acceptable to everyone.
vi. Arranging Transport: If DAE has sufficient vehicles then they should be used. If other
organisations have them, they may be hired.
vii. Making Arrangements for Refreshments and Arrangements for Staying If Needed:
The farmers might agree to bear some of the cost, that would indicate true interest for
the tour.
viii. Gathering or Arranging for the Farmers to Meet at a Convenient Place and Time: This
would be easy to do if it is decided beforehand through mutual agreement.
If planned well, it is very easy to carry out a motivational tour. While arranging the tour, the
following topics should be considered:
i.
Making sure that the farmers were picked up from one place accordingly to the plan
and the planned route and the schedule are being maintained
ii.
The conductors of the tour should encourage the touring farmers to answer questions
and explain topics of observation
iii. Briefing the programme, answering any final questions while coming back and
deciding on a possible succession procedure through discussion
iv. Noting down a list of names and mobile phone numbers of the farmers before the tour
is over.
i.
Implementation

11.12 Participatory Technology Development
Participatory Technology Development is a process of developing technologies conducted by
farmers. The purposes of this process are:
Testing the farmer's ideas on technologies
ii.
Locally testing out technologies that have been successful in other areas
iii. Testing out partial changes made to the existing or recommended technologies or
making arrangements for testing if they are more efficient in local environment
iv.
Enabling the farmers to solve their own problems by testing out new ideas or
technologies.
Participation-based technology development process is different from demonstrations, because:
i.
Farmers are not shown tested or recommended technologies
ii.
Is run on the basis of participation of farmers and farmers are the complete stakeholders
iii. Cannot be predicted, nothing can be told for sure and nothing is promised.
Participation-based technology development is a learning process for everyone including
extension workers who have worked as service providers before. Farmers are actually active
developers of a lot of technologies. Participation-based technology development is related to the
revised extension programme which encourages participation from farmers in extension work.
Participatory Technology Development projects are carried out for testing out solutions to the
problems of farmers or farmers’ groups or organisations. The following steps can be followed
for planning:
i.
Deciding the Topic with the Farmer or Farmer's Organisation: The farmer and the
extension worker should decide the topic of the technology testing together. SAAO plays
the main role here, however, the responsibility belongs to the Agricultural Extension
Officer. This should be consulted with the Scientific Officer of the research centre.
When the farmers identify a problem, the process of testing out a new technology or idea
is starts right away. At this stage farmers should be encouraged to ponder upon problems,
privileges and ideas a lot. Regardless of the source of the idea, the farmer has the
authority to take the final decision about what to do and how.
ii.
Planning a Field for Testing: Farmers or farmer's organisations and SAAOs, with the help
of Agricultural Extension Officers, can discuss policies of technology testing, development
and make proposals.The proposal must be regarding various ways of increasing
production that farmers would be willing to test.
i.
Planning
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

The proposal may contain the amount of fertilizer and the time to apply it, the amount and
time of applying pesticides, distance of the planting, the level and timing of irrigation,etc. The
fundamental principle is that the factors must have differences and be observed based on
income, cost and benefit. Since participation-based technology development is a new process
to DAE, it is better to keep it limited within one factor and two plots. Once the factors are
decided, the farmer can decide what to do in which plot.
Participatory Technology Development can be successfully carried out by:
Encouraging the farmer to talk about it to his neighbours and friends
ii.
Arranging field days on PTD locations. PTD should be a group process as much as
possible and may be conducted along with group discussions, farm tours, motivational
tours to research institutes and other extension programmes
iii. Holding regular inspection to observe progress, give advices, learn and help solve
problems
iv. inviting the Agricultural Extension Officer or Scientific Officer if there are problems
that the SAAO cannot solve,
v.
Writing down the progress together the farmer and SAAO should write down the
progress of field works, time, amount and price of materials, problems presented and
steps taken together. The SAAO may write down all the data in his or her diary and the
farmer can be encouraged to keep record of his own data.
vi. The cost should be written down after the field work is done. With the assistance of
extension staff, the farmer’s cost, harvest (including by-productand other
information) should be written down.
vii. Holding field days to observe which technology is the most suited to this particular
field and determining the proportion of cost to profit for each plot.
During the implementation of the plan, the extension worker should keep close contact with
the research institute. This could be kept formally through the Agricultural Technical
Coordination Committee or informally through personal contact with the extension worker
and the local research worker. The plan of PTD is approved after examining it through a
meeting.
A formal training day is a group extension method. This is a well-organized process that
contains a written plan and purpose as well as training and training materials. It is a half-day or
full-day programme held for 20-30 farmers. This could be held at any place in a district,
upazila, union or block levels.
i.
11.13 Formal Training Day

Fundamental Principles
11.13.1.1 Involvement of the Participants
11.13.1.2 Relevant and Practical
11.13.1.3 Feedback
Planning
Three principles are applicable for formal training days. These are: involving the participants,
be relevant and practical and feedback.
The learning process of the participating farmers should be active and they should contribute
actively to the process as well. The training should not be a one-way flow of information (from
trainer to farmer). Farmers can learn much more efficiently if they participate actively.
Knowledge can be gained through discussing, asking questions, encouraging the participants
to ask questions and always relating the topics to the farmers’ interests and situations. They
should be given the opportunity to play a role as much as possible by giving opinions, advices,
sharing experiences, asking questions and showing their capabilities.
The topic of training should be related to the daily farm management and centred around
related problems. Proper training should be built based on the learning needs, knowledge,
experiences and the skills and abilities of the participants to learn properly. ‘Practical’ means
the topics of the training should be of practical use. Thus, training processes should have more
opportunities for learning by doing.
The training system should encourage getting feedback from the farmers. It is possible to
learn how much the farmers have managed to understand the topic through asking questions
and inviting them to comment on the topic, as well as how relative their learning is to the
topic. The programme may be coordinated to ensure that the participants are learning
something and they will be able to use it later.
The topics of formal training days should be identified based on the demands and problems of
the farmers. It is the best time to discuss those topics. It could be included in annual extension
plans or carried out to meet demands on urgent basis. Necessary arrangements should be
requested to the Upazilla Officers. This should include:
Selecting an appropriate trainer
b.
Selecting place, date and time for the programme
c.
Making a training plan
a.
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Preparing necessary training materials and multimedia slides
e.
Making budget and arrangements for the money needed.
A trainer or a group of trainers who possess technical knowledge and necessary skills to train
and help farmers learn about the topic should be selected.
The location should be chosen to meet the requirements of the participating farmers and
trainers. If the trainer is local then the programme should be held at a block or union level. The
location could be a local school, union parisad hall, government office or local NGO office.
Determining a the objectives and making a written training plan is a must for a formal training
day. The steps of making a training plan are given below:
i.
Deciding the learning objectives of the programme-1 the objectives would be the
expected measurable learning result
ii.
Choosing a topic that would assist in achieving the objectives
iii. Arranging the topics so that they are relative, logical and educational
iv. Choosing a topic that would be efficient for achieving the objectives or encouraging
farmers to participate
v.
Deciding which equipment or material would be needed to hold the programme
vi. Allocating time necessary to carry out the programme or event.
Identifying beneficial insects might be the objective or title of an IPM programme.
Objectives: At the end of the programme participants should be able to identify benefiting
insects and how they reside within a rice field.
It should be ensured that the participants have gained necessary skill to identify beneficial
insects. The training plan may include the following:
i.
Showing pictures of the beneficial insects and their key identification features in
flash cards
d.
a. Selecting an Appropriate Trainer
b. Selecting Location, Date and Time of the Programme
c. Making a Training Plan
Examples

Showing preserved samples of beneficial insects and discussing their benefits and
usefulness
iii. Making a short walk in a field to search for and identify beneficial insects
iv. Use a flip chart to explain which activities help the beneficial insects to reside in the
cultivation fields
It is necessary to actively involve the participants in the formal training day, give them the
opportunity to give back a message and make the programme realistic and practical. This
means without limiting it to lectures and discussions, some of the following training methods
should be used.
Discussions initiate two way communication between the trainers and trainees as well as
amongst the trainees themselves. It creates opportunities to dissolve misunderstandings,
collect further information, exchanging opinions and test possibilities. There are various ways to
assist a discussion, such as:
Question answer sessions: Requesting the trainees to write questions on the topic, collecting
the questions and reading them one by one and asking the other group members to answer
them. After receiving the answers, the trainer should add his or her own comments.
Brainstorming: The trainer would select a topic and ask the trainees to respond instantly.
These responses would be quickly written to the board. This level of the process should not
contain any discussions and only collect instant ideas and they should be written down
regardless of the content. Once the board is filled, the trainer should present the ideas one by
one and ask the trainees to comment on them.
The Response Providing Group After a lecture, multimedia presentation or field inspection,
group members should be divided into teams of 4 or 5 and be asked to make a report on a
particular side of the work done previously. One person should be chosen as the reporter who
would read the report on behalf of his teammates after five minutes and answer any
questions.
Like discussions, group exercises should also include exchange of information amongst the
trainees. It would also help the trainees to apply knowledge practically, increase their
knowledge, understand the relevance of the knowledge and apply it in practical fields.
ii.
Discussions
Group Exercise
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Preparing or Finding the Necessary Materials
The training method would help determine the training materials needed. These should be
looked for or made beforehand. In the example of IPM we see that the materials needed are
flash cards, boxes of preserved insects and flip charts.
Training should be held in a relaxing environment. Adequate time should be given to discuss
and explain the topics that has not been understood clearly. Time should be distributed
carefully to each of the segments of the programme so that nothing has to be finished in a
hurried manner. The words to speak should be one that every participant understands. The
training should be made lively by using multimedia and various visual materials.
Roleplay initiates exchange of logics and counter-logics between trainees and farmers or
farmers and extension workers. Roleplay cannot be used to gain actual knowledge, however
they are great to use for making the farmers participate actively in educational programmes
and an efficient way for extension workers to learn about the ideas, perceptions and
knowledge of the farmers.
Farmer's field schools are usually set up and run with the help of DAE headquarters. They are
usually arranged to introduce a new technology as part of the national programme.
The FFS work method is field-centred and participatory, they help learning by doing. Training takes
place over one cropping season and is coordinated with a combination of classrooms and field
works. Training is holistic in that it follows the farming system adopted by the participants. This
means training starts from the current state of agricultural knowledge and skills of the farmers.
Usually trainers are selected from the DAE main office and assigned various roles. For
example, the duty of conducting the core training may be assigned to the Agricultural
Extension Officer with the assistance of two SAAOs. The core trainer should receive training
on the technology to be introduced and how to plan and direct FFS. Other officers might also
play important roles. For example, the Additional Director or the Deputy-Director might be
selected to monitor the process.
Implementation
Roleplays
Planning
11.14 Farmer’s Field School

The Training of Trainers programme provides training to the core trainers about how to make
FFS methods according to the technology. The course might last for quite a long time. This
training usually includes:
Selecting farmers
b.
Arranging training materials
c.
Selecting a location for field works and programmes
d.
Preparations for every session.
a. Selecting Farmers: The course designer would decide guidelines about how to select the
participating farmers. This guideline may include the following:
i.
Ensuring that the training is open to both males and females, the number of targeted
farmers or organisations would be included here
ii.
Selecting farmers according to their current agricultural practice , for example, IPM
trainings would need a number of farmers who use pesticides in large amounts
iii. Selecting the farmers who live nearby so that farmers’ group formation can be
encouraged during FFS and afterwards.
b. Arranging the Training Material: In case of training materials that are not kept in the
resource centre, specialist training might be needed. There might be a long list of materials
that must be arranged before each weekly training session.
c. Selecting the Location for Programmes and Field Works: Training sessions should be held
in classrooms and on fields. Schools, UP office or NGO meeting rooms could serve as a
classroom. It should be as near to the houses of the farmers as possible. Similarly, the land for
fieldwork should also be near the farmer's houses so that the training can be held in an
environment as natural as possible.
d. Preparations for Each Session: Weekly sessions are usually prepared by the senior
technical officers and tested during the training of trainers. This process would actively
involve the core trainers and train them on technologies and implementing FFS curriculums.
The sessions should be flexible so that special local information can be coordinated into the
curriculum.
a.
Extension Methods Based on Farmer's Groups or Organisations

Implementation
The main topic of the FFS would be pre-decided and the guidelines for implementation are
most likely to come as a part of the trainers’ training, however, the following is listed as some
things to consider:
Preparing and Arranging a Course: Just as other training programme, FFS curriculum should
also be well prepared and organised. FFS is a season-long process, so the training facilities
should be kept prepared for the training and be maintained in an orderly manner. .
Maintaining Interest: The content of the next training sessions should be discussed with the
participants when each training session will be approaching to end. For example, where the
programme will be held, what the groups or organisations would be in charge of, how long the
field work would last etc. FFS sessions should be as much participative and active as possible.
Farmer's Groupor or Organisation: The main focus of most FFS is to encourage the
participants to work in groups or organisations. Some FFS intentionally include some activities
in the course that would help forming groups.
Helping Two-way Learning: Both the trainer and the participants should learn together
through the field work. This would support learning that is based on solving problems and
actions, which is an important skill for every participant to possess for developing.

Mass Media and AudioVisual Aids
Chapter

The quickly expanding mass media and information technologies enable instant
communication with large number of farmers at a lower cost. The medias required to meet
the information-needs of the agricultural extension workers, mass media workers and the
farmers are:
a.
Electronic media
b.
Print media and audio-visual aid.
Television plays a great role in communication. With the passage of time radios are becoming
obsolete while television is spreading all over the country. Besides Bangladesh Television and
many private channels are also broadcasting agriculture programmes. All television channels
are also broadcasting news about agriculture. Nowadays, many community televisions have
been set up to telecast the programmes like community radios.
Television is the most popular media for dissemination of information to mass people in
Bangladesh. The number of television viewers will be greater than the television viewers in
other places. Due to the penetration of cable TVs in rural areas, a vast population in rural areas
watch satellite channels. The agricultural programmes that are being broadcasted by
Bangladesh Television a few other satellite channels are-
i.
Bangladesh Television -
Mati O Manush; Banglar Krishi; Krishi Dibadishi,
Bangladesh Krishi; SAARC Krishi
ii.
Channel I
-
Hridaye Mati O Manush; Hridaye Mati O Manusher Dak;
Fire Chalo Matir Tane
iii.
Banglavision
-
Shyamal Bangla
iv.
ZTV
-
Shabuj Bangla
v.
Dipto TV
-
Dipto Krishi
vi.
ATN Bangla
-
Matir Shubash; Shonali Din
vii. Ekattur TV
-
Krishi Jog
viii. Mohona TV
-
Mohonar Krishi O Krishak
ix.
My TV
-
Khamarbari
x.
Bijoy TV
-
Krishi Karma
12.1 Electronic Media
12.1.1 Television
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids
Agricultural Extension Manual 231

Besides these programmes, the television channels broadcast agricultural news in the
national or local news segment. Reports to spread awareness, documentaries,
advertisements, plays, animations, informative short programmes and movies are also
broadcasted in television. The television channels have continued to broadcast new
technological extensions, their usage and benefits the success of the farmers who already
used them.
Radios were once considered a very popular medium of entertainment and an effective tool
in extension work. With the passage of time, the situation has changed. However, radios are
still an effective tool during times of disasters. Bangladesh Betar, FM channels and
community radios are still in operation. In addition, radios are accessible through mobile
phones nowadays.
Community radios are based within a community. These are small businesses where only a
few people work to disseminate the radio programmes within a small geographic coverage. In
this digital era, while many people in the urban areas have access to high speed internet, many
in the rural areas have limited awareness and access to these facilities. Lack of information is a
major hindrance in the development of rural areas. In this context, community radios
broadcast information to these communities regarding their economic, social and
behavioural aspects in their local dialect. This is precisely why radio is nicknamed ‘the voice of
the voiceless’, or termed ‘my radio, my voice’.
Currently, there are 17 ongoing community radio programmes such as Radio Sagargiri
(Sitakunda), Radio Nalta (Kaliganj), Radio Mukti (Bogra), Radio Pallikantha (Moulvibazar),
Barendra Radio (Rajshahi) Radio Mahananda (Chapai Nawabganj), Radio Padma (Rajshahi),
Radio Jhinuk (Jhinaidaha), Radio Bikrampur (Munsiganj), Radio Lakbetar (Borguna Sadar),
Radio Chilmari (Kurigram), Radio Shundarban (Koyra), Radio Naf (Teknaf), Krishi Radio
(Amtoli, Borguna), Radio Meghna (Vola), Radio Sagardip (Hatia), and Radio Sarabela
(Gaibandha). Each of these are broadcasting programmes with importance on different issues
such as rural and agricultural developments, uprooting extreme poverty and hunger, reducing
infant mortality, child marriage, suicide, bringing gender equality and female empowerment,
health and nutrition, women and children, and public primary education. They also play a
meaningful role during natural disasters.
12.1.2 Radio
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

Agricultural programmes are broadcast at a national and regional levels by 11 centres of
Bangladesh Betar:
i.
Dhaka
-
Krishi Shamachar; Desh Amar Mati Amar; Shonali Fashal; Amar
Desh; Shasya Shyamal; Shabuj Prantar.
ii.
Chitttagong
-
Krishi Shamachar; Krishi Khamar
iii.
Khulna
-
Krishi Shamachar; Chashabad
iv.
Rangpur
-
Krishi Shamachar; Khet Khamar
v.
Rajshahi
-
Khet Khamar Shamachar; Shabuj Bangla
vi.
Syhlet
-
Ajker Chashabad, Shyamal Syhlet
vii.
Rangamati
-
Khamarbari
viii.
Barishal
-
Chashabash
ix.
Cox’s Bazaar
-
Shonali Prantar
x.
Thakurgao
-
Kishan Mati Bangladesh
xi.
Comilla
-
Shujala-Shufala
x.
Krishi Radio (community radio) and Krishi radio (FM 98.8) broadcast from
9 am 11 pm and 3 pm – 9 pm.
Head Office
DAE’s media cell and Agricultural Information Service work with Bangladesh Betar in the
following ways:
i.
DAE makes a priority list for ‘media cell working group’ meetings for inclusion into radio
schedules and submits it to the quarterly planning meetings of AIS and Bangladesh Betar
ii.
By submitting a complete script to Bangladesh Betar or by providing training materials
which can be used to make a radio script
iii. By providing the headlines of the more important subjects and the extension
programmes’ schedule to Bangladesh Betar and inviting them to record the
programmes’ activities for future broadcasting
iv. The employees of Bangladesh Betar employees are taken to the fields for interviewing
the farmers for broadcasting.
Region
The responsibility of coordinating with Bangladesh Betar’s Local Radio Station is given to the
Additional Director (region).
–
Working with Bangladesh Betar

The following are included in this coordination:
i.
Participating in local Bangladesh Betar’s planning meetings
ii.
Providing copies of the extension plan to Bangladesh Betar so that they can (a) broadcast
it in the next program and (b) participate in the programme, and record the program.
iii. Providing essential information for important subjects or inclusion in to the next
month’s schedule and the district bulletin
iv. Inviting Bangladesh Betar to the District Agricultural Technical Coordination
Committees at
and to the Local Agricultural Technical Coordination
Committees’ relevant meetings at
. This is only possible if there is a
Bangladesh Betar broadcasting centre in the district
v.
Inviting Bangladesh Betar employees to agricultural programmes or bringing them to
record the farmers’ interviews.
DAE must be present when Bangladesh Betar will be interviewing farmers or recording an
agricultural extension programme. The checklist below will help to ensure a quality interview.
Before Recording
i.
Ensure that everyone is aware of the purpose and the subject to be learned.
ii.
Before the interview, hold a discussion about the topic of the interview with everyone
so that the interviewees are not caught unprepared during interview.
iii. Check if all aid such as battery cables and headphones are functioning properly.
During the Interview
i.
Ensuring that everyone is comfortable
ii.
Using easy to understand words
iii. Repeating main learning points for listeners’ convenience of understanding
iv. Using precise examples when listeners cannot see so that they can listen
v.
Using ‘What, Why, How’ etc. to make precise and short questions
vi. Providing practical advices about what the farmers can do.
After Recording
i.
Ensure proper editing
ii.
Learn when the programme will be broadcast on the radio
iii. Encourage the farmers to listen to the radio programmes either alone or as a group.
district level
local levels
Instructions about How to Record Interviews
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

12.1.3 District, Upazila and Block
12.1.4 Multimedia Projection
Field workers may not have much influence over the content of the programmes but they can
encourage farmers to listen to the radios. It can be done in different ways:
i.
Collecting the radio schedule’s copy from Bangladesh Betar and informing the farmers
ii.
Listening to agricultural programmes and explaining new information to the farmers
who did not or could not listen before.
Multimedia projection is a great medium for extension communication. It can attractively
present a message as well as conduct a training course through information-based
entertainment. Necessary training materials can be downloaded from the internet and training
materials can be created in visual media through multimedia projection.
Print media and audio-visual aids can be used in many ways to communicate with a large number
of people and at the same time to increase the extension programmes’ quality and effect.
Awareness: By printing an enormous amount of print media and displaying it in public places
or distributing it among people, awareness can be created about new ideas, technologies or
problems- such as an epidemic or manifestation of insects and diseases in crops.
Print media includes newspapers, agricultural magazines, extension messages, agricultural
diaries, agricultural technology-based books, booklets, journals, posters, leaflets, folders,
flipcharts, stickers etc.
Interest: Photographs and images can make extension programmes more attractive.
multimedia projectors, flash cards, photos and samples at extension events are used farmers
will pay more attention than usually they do.
Memory: Presenting the same information in different ways leads to greater retention of
the information in farmers’ minds. Using touch, visual and audio tools is more effective than
only listening.
Explanation: The usage of charts and photographs allow extension workers to explain new
technologies and ideas more clearly and simply. As a result, the participants of the extension
programme can also understand the subject much better.
12.2 Print Media, and Audio-Visual Aids

Result: Photographs, models and flipcharts allow extension workers to show a farmer what
would happen if a farmer adapts a new idea. For example, the photograph of a fish produced
in a rice field will give farmers an idea of what types of fish can be produced there.
Structure: Print-media and audio-visual aids help extension workers design the programme.
For example, A Power point slideshow for projecting the gist of any speech.
Participation: Live samples, models, photographs, flipcharts, flashcards and other printmedia and audio-visual aids help the extension workers to increase participation of the
farmers in the programme. A farmer can bring physical examples (like damaged crops) to give
the programme a direct idea and influence the event.
Real objects and live samples such as crops, seeds, fertilizer, prepared food or insects can be
aids. These can be used efficiently in the extension events with individual farmers or a group
by letting them see, touch or use if necessary.
Newspapers are distributed nationwide and read widely by rural people. Newspapers have
accurate and informative messages and can be used as a cost-effective medium to
disseminate information. Current examples of newspapers which print agricultural messages
are: Prothom Alo (Khet Khamar), Jugantar (Krishi Katha), Naya Diganta (Chashabad), Kaler
Kantha (Chashbash), Ittefak (Hridaye Mati O Manush), Jay Jay Din (Krishi O Shamvabana) etc.
Newspapers can be encouraged to cover the following agricultural subjects.
Extension workers may use the following advice to encourage newspapers to include
agricultural information:
i.
Invite journalists to large-scale extension programmes such as upazila and district fairs
ii.
Invite journalists to important events such as agricultural rehabilitation or incentive
programmes and activities
iii. Send copies of the district bulletin and other locally published print-media (leaflets
and folders) to newspapers
iv. Send copies of received materials from the head office to the local journalists
12.2.1 Real Objects and Live Samples
12.2.2 Newspapers
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

v.
Print press notifications in the local newspapers about successful technologies,
problems and new innovations
vi. Keep an informal relation with local newspapers.
The following should be taken into consideration in publishing agriculture-related information:
i.
Using the right terminologies. There are some common mistakes found in newspapers
such as printing “Agricultural Extension Department” instead of ‘Agricultural
Extension Department or in some articles, it has been said that land has brought about
farming. This is not justifiable because the owner of the land is farmer and it’s farmer
who have farmed lands.
ii.
How they view the new agricultural extension law such as designing programmes
based on farmers’ needs. Copies of printed articles and press notices must be kept in
the office for future use. They can be stored in the press cutting file.
Whiteboards are used extensively for extension events with less than 20 participants. When
using the whiteboard, suggestions given below can be followed.
i.
The board must be well-cleaned and firmly attached
ii.
The board must be attached in a way that every participant has a clear view of the board
iii. Short sentences and large fonts should be used
iv. The facilitator must stand beside the board
v.
The facilitator should avoid talking while writing on the board
vi. Multiple colours can be used to highlight the importance of necessary words.
Increasing Participation: The ideas of the participants are important, so their ideas can be
written down on the whiteboard. So that the participants can brainstorm and do many things
using information related to the IPM’s important principles and related activities. The
extension workers will write down the participants’ ideas. Brainstorming questions can also
be included like- ‘Write down the main problems of implementing IPM’, or ‘What kind of
extension activities can be planned to follow up after displaying this method?’. Brainstorming
questions are usually open questions and help the conversation keep lively.
Summary of the Key Points: The extension worker can write down key-words or sentences on
the board while the speech or presentation will be going on to help the participants
remember the main points.
12.2.3 Standard Method for Press Notices
12.2.4 Whiteboard

Drawing Easy Photographs or Designs: A drawing or design can easily summarize many
words. Photographs or designs drawn on the board must be large and clear and different
colours should be used.
Large paper-sheets are used to make flipcharts. These can be attached to whiteboards or
flipchart stands. Flipcharts are used to help extension programmes of farmer organisations.
Flipcharts are very helpful in summarizing the main learning, brainstorming, writing
questions, and drawing simple Illustrations and designs. Flipcharts are also useful because the
main text and designs can be made prior to the events, and a single flipchart can be used in
multiple programmes or preserved for later use.
Presenting Ready Flipcharts
In this case, the main texts and designs must be made prior to the extension events. The main
text must be written in large letters (with a height of at least 5 cm) and the design must be very
clean. Many bright and contrasting colours (such as blue, black and red) can be used either to
make the extension programme more attractive or to highlight the main points. While using a
ready-made chart for presentation, every sheet should display different subjects or illustrations.
Flipcharts can be used to help the presentation. During brain storming, flipchart papers can be
attached to the board in front of the group. This paper can be used by the extension worker to
write down the ideas of the participants.
Usage of Flipcharts
The points below are helpful when using ready flipcharts:
i.
The flipchart stand, including the flipchart paper must be placed in a way so that all
participants have a clear sight of the stand
ii.
The facilitator should not stand with his back to the participants
iii. The facilitator should try to stand beside the board
iv. The facilitator should turn the page after finishing discussion on the page.
If the flipchart paper is used to assist brainstorming sessions during the extension event, the
points below should be followed:
i.
Asking the participants clear and open questions
ii.
Writing down the participants’ answers correctly and simply to summarize their ideas
iii. Using large fonts and small sentences.
12.2.5 Flipchart
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

Using Flipchart Paper for Group Work
If participants receive flipchart papers during an extension event, the extension workers need
to be more helpful than the trainers. The following should be considered:
i.
The participants must be given clear instructions about what they should write and the
time given for the task. For example: “Please write down the problems you have faced
while using organic fertilizer in the next 10 minutes”
ii.
The participants can use simple illustrations
iii. Group exercises can be considered. For example- 20 participants can be divided into
groups of four consisting of five people in each group. This increases the opportunity
for every member to participate. Two members can be nominated from each team;
one to write on the flipchart and another to present the ideas to the rest of the team
iv. The facilitator should move around the teams to see what they’re doing, clear up their
thoughts and ideas and give advices if needed when they are discussing with each
other, writing their thoughts and drawing.
Flashcards are visual aids which are used to develop the thoughts and ideas of small groups of
farmers and to start discussions about certain subjects. These are usually very easy
explanations drawn on small cards. These can be used in different ways, like:
i.
Showing a photograph to develop discussion on a certain subject such as a healthy
eggplant tree
ii.
A series of cards which have the necessary information about a particular subject or
present important issues for discussion can be used in sequence to explain a story or
an event
iii. Flashcards can make learning much easier as seeing a card will help people establish
connection between the illustration or image and idea.
These are suitable for field-works because these are very simple to use. These are
comparatively cheap and can be made locally. These can be taken to rural group discussions,
and can be made for a specific targeted group. They are easy to plan and can be given to
members of agricultural organisations for careful examination. Besides, they can be displayed
at a place where all the members of an organisation can collectively look at them.
12.2.6 Flashcard

Preparation
The type of extension programme will determine how the flashcards will be planned. The
easiest ways to plan flashcards are:
i.
Thinking about the subject and the target group or organisation and relating these to
key points to be emphasized for making basis of flashcard
ii.
Listing everything and deciding what kind of common photographs can be used to
explain and describe it.
iii. Deciding if the cards will be used serially
iv. Deciding how many cards are needed based on the topic and number of points in the
discussion.
v.
Planning the cards. Every card will have either illustrations or simple explanations. The
photographs should be made more attractive by using as many colours and as few
words as possible
vi. The flashcards should not be bigger than the size of an A4 paper
vii. The cards should be displayed to some people before using to ensure that the cards are
easily understood.
Use of Flashcards
Flashcards usually augment and empower the farmer’s groups and organisations. Some
advice is given below regarding the usage of flashcards:
i.
If the cards have to be used serially, they must be arranged one after another before
the discussion of the groups or organisations. The cards can be easily arranged by
using serial numbers behind the cards.
ii.
The facilitator must ensure that everyone in the group or organisation can see the
cards. The best sitting arrangement would be for the participants to make them sit in a
circle on a carpet instead of sitting on chairs.
Photographs can be used to explain different subjects. An easy way of using, preserving and
making it accessible to many viewers at once is to put it on a display board.
Photographs can be used to explain printed materials such as district bulletins, training
handouts or posters.
Preparation: While taking photographs, we must decide what they will be used for. The main
subject of the photograph should be written behind the photograph after selecting it. The
writing should contain the details of the photograph.
12.2.7 Photographs
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

The points below can be considered when using photographs as supplementary materials:
For Displaying
i.
Using clean backgrounds while displaying the photograph. For example, wrapping a
board in white paper.
ii.
Select good photographs for displaying and pinning them to the board in a logical order
iii. Avoiding too many photographs. People usually get more information if the
photographs are simple and attractive
iv. A headline must be written to explain the main point in each photograph. Use easy
words and phrases that the farmers can easily understand the headline
v.
The display-board must be of a suitable height so that the people can easily see the
photographs.
Usage of Photographs
Photographs can be used in the following ways:
i.
Photographs can be used to show farmers what the extension workers are doing
ii.
It can be used to initiate discussions on certain technologies, like displaying the
photographs to the participants in the training session
iii. Using photos in bulletins, leaflets and posters as example to explain publishing
iv.
To explain the continuity of time, for example, by using monthly photos of the same crop
over a single season.
Posters are large sheets of paper which send message to a large number of people. Posters can
be used to communicate with as people about advertisements for extension events to be
taken place, or for publicity, etc. Ideally, they should be:
i.
Colourful and attractive
ii.
Displayed in an easily accessible place, for example, marketplace or social meeting places
iii. All information should be simple
iv. Poster Should be kept in the Agricultural Expansion Department
v.
Posters should cover 75% description and 25% main subjects.
Preparation
The advices below will be helpful when making posters:
i.
The outline should be simple and attractive.
12.2.8 Posters

ii.
If the poster is used for serving simple messages, (for example- rat control) a
photograph must be selected so that they can easily be understood
iii. If words are used, try to minimize the number of words and make the font large and
clean
iv. The poster design should be shown to others before printing
v.
If a poster is used to publicize an extension event, the poster must include all relevant
information (for example- date, place and time)
vi. Diagrams or drawings can be copied from photographs and design-books or image banks.
Usage of Posters
Since posters are mainly used to create awareness about a specific event or technology,
deciding where to display it is very important.
The place where the poster is displayed needs to be clean so that everyone can see the
message. Posters must always be displayed at an appropriate height so that it is visible to
almost everyone.
Leaflets and folders are printing papers which provide necessary information about the
subject, demonstration, important topics or issues of interest. They are a relevant information
source for people to remember.
Leaflets are small pieces of paper, almost the size of an A5 paper, with both pages printed on,
and folders are large papers, almost the size of an A4 paper, with both pages printed on.
Preparation
The topic of the leaflets and folders are based on the information-needs of the farmers and
the context in which it will be used.
Distributing in Extension Programmes: The printed materials are supplied to farmers as part
of the extension programme events. Distributing leaflets and folders related to field days,
formal training days or empowerment tours can make the programme more effective.
Distributing Outside Extension Programmes: The printed materials are distributed to
farmers through bazars, schools, input dealers, or other channels that do not depend on the
12.2.9 Leaflets and Folders
Mass Media and Audio-Visual Aids

farmer joining the DAE’s extension event. In this case, leaflets and folders are the only sources
of information to the farmer. The material used here usually increases awareness about new
ideas, serious problems or information about an epidemic of disease or insects.
The following advice will be helpful for making a leaflet or folder:
i.
Leaflets and folders should only have the main points. Leaflets should contain
information and events that are hard to remember, like the names of chemicals and
their dosage.
ii.
Their lists should have headlines. If related training materials are not complex then
farmers can use it in future.
iii. Use words that the farmers can understand. Difficult words and quotes should be
avoided and the local names of crops and aids should be used.
iv. All measurements should be in metric units (for example- hectare and ton).
v.
Using photographs and designs when possible. They can be copied from book and
image banks.
Usage of Leaflets and Folders
These can be distributed to the groups participating in the extension programmes, or given to
fertilizer or seed or pesticide aid dealers to distribute among farmers.

Monitoring and Evaluation
Chapter

13.1 Introduction
13.2 Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in Planning Processes
13.3 Rules of Monitoring
The purpose of the agricultural extension programme is determined with the farmer's
information-needs as the primary focus. Fulfilling the determined objectives are is the criteria
of success and different indicators are used to determine the level of success.
i.
Monitoring is the process of documenting the completed stages of a process after
determining the indicators, which can be done through direct observation of the work
process or by compiling data of the work process during the period of implementation.
It, in fact, is a process of observing indicators of progress for any ongoing work
ii.
On the other hand, evaluation is the analysis of the indicators and the data gathered in
order to determine the ways to improve the quality and rate of future work which is
done later after implementation
iii. The implementation of the DAE's extension programmes accordingly to the plan can
be measured by monitoring and evaluation tools and the farmer's needs being met
can be ensured
iv. Effective monitoring and evaluation supply accurate and relevant information to the right
people, at the right time in the right formats so that the timely decisions can be made.
i.
Monitoring and evaluation are tools used for the improvement of efficiency and quality of
the work done by working officers and employees in district and upazila levels by the DAE
ii.
Monitoring and evaluation are respectively conducted during and after the
implementation. Monitoring is only useful when the data gathered from monitoring
are analysed and used to take necessary future steps
iii. Farmer's information-needs assessment and evaluation‒ these two sources provide
the data necessary to prepare the plans for extension programmes. Lack of sufficient
data from either source leads to a low quality planning.
i.
The process must be simple yet informative
ii.
The main focus of monitoring is reduction of complexities in field work
iii. Monitoring must be performed in due time
iv. Monitoring must be relevant and pertinent to the aim of the programme.
Monitoring and Evaluation
Agricultural Extension Manual 247

v.
The information gained through monitoring must be logically accurate so that it can be
assured for use in management work
vi. The process must be participation-based and all people related to the extension must
participate
vii. The process must be flexible as monitoring can be repeated and its result will be
changed with the passage of time
viii. Monitoring must be activity-based, there is no need to collect insignificant data
ix. The process must be cost and time efficient; simple, timely, relevant and accurate
monitoring is cost effective
x.
Monitoring should be initiated from the top management
xi. The requirements of top management must be kept in mind while designing the
blueprint of the monitoring proposal
xii. The monitoring unit should provide specialized service instead of staying limited to
data-collection and analysis, such as identification of problems and finding solutions
to the identified problems.
A SAAO Diary is an important tool used in the extension approach of DAE. It also assists the
monitoring and evaluation processes. The SAAO records the details of their daily work in their
diaries which include what is done, with whom and the response received etc. Especially
while visiting individual farms, the problems faced by the farmers, their names, and their
response towards participation in the events are noted down in the diary. A diary is an
important source of detailed block level information about what is working well and why, and
what is not working well and why.
If the extension workers are at a field or away from office, mobile phones can be used to gain
whereabouts and an overview of the work progress and to provide necessary instructions to
them. If farmers face problems while implementing or applying certain advices, they can
contact the relevant personnel by phone and come up with a solution.
13.4 SAAO Diary
13.5 Mobile Monitoring
Monitoring and Evaluation

13.6 Monitoring Field Work through Telephone or Mobile Phone or
Mobile Apps
13.7 Technology Extension Monitoring System (TEMS)
Usually field work is monitored and managed by personnel present in the field, but that's
limited to the easily accessible fields, causing most of the rest of the area to be left untended to.
For the fields that cannot be supervised in flesh, monitoring and supervision may be done
through the use of telephones, mobile phones and mobile apps so as to speed up the field work.
For speeding up the work processes, the DAE's practical wing, area, district and upazila offices
will have databases that hold records for the most advanced and successful farmer who
received modern technology earlier than everyone else. The working officers must contact at
least 3-4 farmers listed in the database from different blocks and note down in the respective
register various information regarding the progress of the farmers' implemented programmes
(exhibitions or incentive or rehabilitation) and whether they are facing any problems
regarding the use of the equipment supplied under the programme. In case of such problems
coming to light, the concerned extension worker must be instantly notified to visit the field in
person and find a solution.
The Deputy Director of the region, ADD (Crop) of the district and an AEO of upazila will ensure
the preservation of data in the register and respective follow up. If one of the positions is
vacant, another officer of equivalent position may be temporarily given the charge.
Officers in the region or district levels may present the results of their monitoring and
evaluation process in the monthly meetings, discuss them and take necessary steps if
required. Monthly region or district level reports must be sent to the Director, Field Services
Wing through the control room.
It must be ensured that every block comes under monitoring and supervision procedures
through telephone or mobile at least once per month. The block to be monitored can be
chosen randomly.
TEMS is proposed in order to ensure recording progress indicators of extension programmes
that would properly assist in the planning and decision making of future projects.

Indicators Used in TEMS
13.7.1 Decisions Made by Using the TEMS Indicators
The primary indicators of TEMS are as follows:
Contact or Presence: The number of farmers (male, female,
and small) attending the
extension event and the cost per farmer.
Understanding or Gaining the Ability to Independently Use Technologies: The number of
farmers who understand the concepts (technologies) contained in the extension event or are
able to utilize the technology suggested by the extension event and cost per farmer.
Testing: The number of farmers who have decided to test out the extension event's
technology in the following year and the cost per farmer.
Monitoring and Evaluation help in decisions regarding better management. The management
decision which can be made with the help of TEMS may be as follows:
Technology Selection: What agricultural technologies should be included into the extension
programmes.
Method Selection: Which of the extension methods should be included in the extension
programme.
Area Selection: Those areas (region or upazila or district) require special supervision or
support. TEMS helps in determining which technologies and extension methods are the most
or least successful as well as in recognizing the areas where the extension programme see the
most or least success. Based on this information, various decisions can be made for constant
improvement of the extension services provided to the farmers.
Some of the steps that can be taken for improving less efficient technologies, extension
methods and areas are as follows:
Poor Technology
i.
Upgrading the technology with the help of researchers and farmers who have tested it.
ii.
Change the extension method; For example, providing training instead of
demonstration results.
large
Monitoring and Evaluation

iii. Improvement of the extension event; Proper advertisement, choice of a suitable time
and place to hold the event.
iv. Reduction of budget and asset for the this technology in the next extension event.
Defective Methods
i.
Changing the extension method
ii.
Training the extension workers for better implementation of the method
iii. Using the method in combination with other extension methods. For example, adding
an increased number of field days alongside result demonstration
iv. Eliminating the extension method from future programmes.
Poor Area
i.
Arranging extra training for extension workers in the area.
ii.
Increasing of supervising and monitoring in the area, including the use of technical
audits.
iii. Providing further advice regarding selection of suitable technologies and extension
methods to use in the programme.
iv. Scaling down the programme and reducing budget for the area until the quality and
amount of performance improves.
Data accumulated by TEMS on contact, understanding and testing helps in enhancing the
quality of extension programmes. In case of deficiency in any of the three aspects, the
following steps can be taken:
Low Contact
i.
Providing more profitable technologies
ii.
Putting emphasis on advertisement so that more farmers can attend the extension event
iii. Organizing the event in the right time
iv. Reviewing the farmer selectin for the event
v.
Hosting the event in a convenient location.
Low Understanding
i.
Improving the presentation of new concepts by using simple language, audio-visual
aids and live samples, etc
ii.
Providing more training for the extension workers so as to carry out the event better
iii. Training extension workers on teaching skills.

Lower Number of Testing
i.
Improving quality of the extension event at which the technology is discussed.
ii.
Acquiring feedback from farmers for researchers to use in improving the technology
suitably for the farmer's situation and needs.
Decisions must be taken in consideration of the type of farmers. For example, in case of the
time and location of the event being changed, the new time and location should be decided
depending on whether the targeted audience is male or female, as the suitable time or
location may vary for the two types of farmers.
Regardless of the sources of funds or projects, TEMS is applicable for all activities of the DAE.
TEMS has four forms: TEMS forms 1, 2, 3 and 4. TEMS forms 2, 3 and 4 are compiled from the
written data of TEMS form 1. The UAEs must fill out TEMS forms 2, 3 and 4 each and submit
them to the district Deputy Director. Similarly, the district Deputy Director will submit it to the
Additional Director of Region, who will submit it to the Director of Field Services Wing and the
Director of Planning, project implementation, and ICT Wing.
TEMS forms 1, 2, 3 and 4 are shown in appendix 7 (1, 2, 3, and 4).
TEMS Form 1: Primary Monitoring Form
TEMS Form 1 is an individual form and used for all kinds of extension events. Regardless of the
funding sources, every SAAO or the senior officer responsible for implementing the event
must fill out a TEMS Form 1 for each of their events. UAOs will fill out a TEMS Form 1 for each
upazilla level events such as upazilla fairs, training days. The same applies for district level
events such as district training days. For the same type of events, district and upazila level
information must be unified or combined and summarised.
The TEMS Form 1 must be filled out in the spot, at the time of extension event takes place so
that the following indicators can be collected:
i.
Contact: Number of attending farmers.
ii.
Understanding: Number of attending farmers who think they understand the shown
technology.
iii. Testing: Number of farmers who think they will utilize the technology.
At the end of the season, all TEMS Forms 1 must be collected and sorted through and a
13.7.2 Technology Extension Monitoring System (TEMS)
Monitoring and Evaluation

technology or event or area based stack (whichever is applicable) must be made for forms 2, 3
and 4 to be filled. Finally, the average of the indicators should be calculated.
TEMS Form 2: Technology Summary Form
TEMS Form 2 is an individual form which is used to summarize various types of data related to
the same technology. For example, data from all the events regarding use of balanced
fertilizer for rice production (meaning, summary of data of the same kind of technology and
event) is compiled and recorded in a TEMS Form 2. At the end of the season, the UAO will use a
TEMS Form 2 to summarize all the events. The required sections such as contact,
understanding and testing must be filled out properly.
With the help for TEMS Form 2, various technologies can be compared and the relatively
successful and unsuccessful ones can be identified.
TEMS Form 3: Extension Event Type Summary Form
TEMS Form 3 is used to summarise information about extension methods conducted in a
season. For every extension method, a TEMS Form 3 should exist, for example, one form for
result demonstrations, one for upazila training day, and so on. This way, summary of each
extension method is prepared.
The quality and rate of performance of extension methods can be determined and compared
using TEMS Form 3.
TEMS Form 4: Area Based Extension Event (Upazila or District or Region) Summary Form
Extension programmes are conducted in block, upazila, district and regional levels. TEMS
Form 4 summarizes the performance of the extension programmes in these areas. One TEMS
Form 4 must be filled out for each upazilla, district and region. At the end of each season,
upazila, district and region level officers should complete one TEMS Form 4 for each upazila,
district and region respectively. TEMS Forms 2 and 3 are used to fill out TEMS Form 4s.
After filling TEMS Form 4 , the overall performance of events executed in upazila, districts and
region can be determined and compared between areas. For example, during the comparing,
farmers willing to test ideas of one area might turn out to be using abnormally high resources
leading to higher cost per farmer than that in another area, which indicates that the area in
question requires additional support, training or supervision.

13.8 Knowledge, Attitude and Practices Survey (KAP)
i.
Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (KAP) Survey is a Monitoring and Evaluation technique
ii.
Through this, actual reaction of farmers after being introduced to new concepts can
be known
iii. Changes in agricultural techniques are apparent from KAP survey results
iv. The incidents occurring throughout extension events can be known from Extension
Monitoring Procedures
v.
The effects of the results following the implementation of extension events can be
known through KAP survey
vi. Upazilla and district officers use KAP survey to increase the effectiveness of extension work
vii. KAP survey is used to determine whether farmers have truly embraced the new concepts.
When the correct season returns, KAP survey must be held to determine the following factors:
i.
Whether the farmers have remembered knowledge of the technology (K)
ii.
Whether the farmers have positive Attitude (A) towards the technology
iii. Whether the farmers have put the technology to practice (P).
By interviewing a sample number of the farmers who had seen the technologies, their
knowledge, attitude and practice levels can be determined. The names and addresses of
those who had participated in previous DAE programmes can be found in the demonstration
register or SAAO diary.
If farmers do not take to using the new cultivation technology, it should be assumed that they
are experiencing negative effects. This indicates a problem that must be dealt with. The
reasons behind such non-adoption of new ideas can be divided into three categories:
i.
The farmers are not aware of the new concepts or ideas; they have no knowledge on it.
ii.
The farmers are aware of the new concepts but choose to reject them it they hold a
negative ATITUDE towards the concepts.
iii. The farmers are aware and favourable in attitude but due to some other problems (for
example, lack of tools, etc.) prevent them from practising the new techniques they do
not PRACTISE.
Responsibilities
i.
KAP survey can be performed at any level of DAE
ii.
Usually KAP survey is performed in district or upazila levels since most planning
decisions are taken at this level.
13.8.1 Utilization of KAP Survey Results for Improvement of Performance
Quality and Quantity
Monitoring and Evaluation

iii. Agricultural Extension Officer at upazilas and Additional Deputy Director (Crops) at
districts are responsible for planning KAP surveys in every season
iv. On a national scale, the Implementation and Evaluation section of Planning, Project
Implementation and ICT wing can arrange, conduct and report the survey.
There are 6 steps of conducting a KAP survey:
i.
Selection of technologies and compilation of their key components
ii.
Collection of documents of the participants and creating sample
iii. Creation and pre-testing of survey form
iv. Holding interviews
v.
Summarisation and analysis of results
vi. Compiling a report on the obtained results.
While selecting technologies, the ones exhibiting the following characteristics should be
prioritised:
i.
The technology which has been emphasized by the Extension Programme depending
on the time and resources allotted to the workers.
ii.
The technology which has been developed for majority of the targeted groups.
iii. The technology which utilises modern techniques.
iv. As KAP is a follow-up-technique, the proper time to evaluate the technologies adapted
which was in the extension programme for the corresponding season one year ago.
For example, proper time to evaluate the adoption rate of transplanting aman by
farmers in the previous Kharif-II season should be the current Kharif-II season
v.
The goal of the K part of KAP is to determine whether the extension activities have
been effective in providing farmers with information about new technology.
i.
KAP survey is basically looking up certain participants of previous extension events and
interviewing them to find out whether they have used the exhibited technology
ii.
Selection of samples must be done randomly by a method where all the farmers will
have equal chance of getting selected
iii. Selection of samples of farmers should be done randomly.
13.8.2 Implementing KAP Survey
13.9 Selection of Technologies and Compilation of Key Points of
the Technology
13.10 Collection of Participant's Records and Selection of Samples

13.11 Creation of Survey Form and Pre- testing.
KAP questionnaires have no rigid formats or structure as it depends on the number and type
of key components of the technology. The questionnaire should be made as simple and
understandable as possible to make the interviewing process smooth. A sample survey form
on rice variety technology is given below. It is divided into three sections.
Section A holds the detailed description of identification, technology, season, name, gender
and location of farmers and farmer groups according to the size of their farm. This data help
determining whether the DAE's targeting principle is effective.
Section B holds information regarding the farmer's participation and whether they actually
were present in the process of the extension event.
Section B: Ensuring the evidence of participation in extension work
Farmers themselves will ascertain their participation with Yes/No (fill up circles)
Section C: Knowledge, Attitude and Practice
a. KAP related to the key points of technology
Information
Name of variety
Properties
Season
Life span
Gist of the approved
technology
BRRI dhan-62
Tall, lean and rich in zinc
Transplant Aman
100 days
Respondent’s
knowledge of
the key points
Respondent’s
practice
(in this year)
Respondent’s
attitude
towards the
main/key points
Father/Husband:
Block:
District:
Farmer’s mobile number:
Farmer’s name:
Village:
Upazilla:
Agriculture environment category:
Section A: Detailed description of the identification
Kharif-II, 2016
Season under evaluation
Kharif-II, 2016
Season
Varietal Demonstration
Technology
Transplant Amon, BRRI Dhan- 62
Crop or Variety
Extension Approaches
Monitoring and Evaluation

Section C is the actual KAP assessment. The farmer's knowledge of, attitude towards and
actual practice in using the technology is described in this section. There is a space specified
where farmer's attitude towards the technology for recording in details. Especially, negative
attitudes of farmers towards the technology are the most important as they're vital to any
correction to the technology required to make it acceptable.
As such, the attitudes of the farmers who reject the technology despite understanding the key
components of the technology are the most valuable.
The techniques for interviewing farmers are very important. Rules to abide by in order to hold
a successful interview:
i.
The interviewe must be made clear about the purpose behind the interview
ii.
The interviewer must remain neutral
iii. The interviewer must not tell the farmer what to answer. He must not hint at which
answer is preferable
iv. Actual data about the problems are always the most valuable; the interviewers must
not advise biased answers out of the farmer
v.
The interviewer must not express in any way his dissatisfaction with the farmer's answer
vi. The interviewer must be knowledgeable about the topic and purpose of the interview.
The items in the questionnaires must be gone through in proper sequence. In special cases,
extra-questions may be asked but no existing question can be skipped.
The goal of KAP survey is to find out the real response of the targeted farmers’ group towards
the extension. Therefore, crafting false results through partial interviews should be prohibited.
13.12 Interviewing the Farmers
13.12.1 The Interviewer has to Follow Order of Sequence
13.12.2 Discarding Partiality
Crop
Resistance to
pest / disease
3.5-4.5 MT/Hectare
Locality prone to ‘KholPora’ disease may lead
to outbreak
b. Detailed description of farmer's attitude

Partiality can arise due to many reasons. But it can be avoided by following the rules of
conducting interviews properly. All interviewers and participants has to follow the
instructions of interview. Some ways to avoid partiality are listed below:
i.
Randomly chose samples must be retained
ii.
Sequence should be maintained throughout the interview
iii. The farmers must not be discriminated against and be approached with a simple,
friendly manner
iv. The interview should be conducted in a place and time the farmer is comfortable with
v.
General instructions are to be maintained in all kinds of participatory discussions
vi. SAAO are not to be given information of the chosen farmers beforehand
vii. No SAAO should be sent to scout farmers to interview before extension workers in charge
viii. Farmers must not be bribed
ix. No hints regarding which answer is preferable to another should be given to the farmers.
i.
Data analysis and report compilation: If possible, it should be done by the interviewer,
as he can have observed and noted many things outside the main questionnaire
ii.
The report must be concise and simple
iii. A briefing including KAP's proposals should be summarized within 1 page.
Segments to Include into KAP Report
i.
Abstracts
ii. Introduction
iii. Results
iv Analyses
v
Recommendation and necessary work-plans
Abstract: A brief description of the key points of introduction, analysis and recommendation.
Any mentioned result will be thoroughly chosen and only explanatory. No topics outside the
main report should be present here.
Introduction: includes names of the districts and upazillas sarveyed unders the KAP survey,
names, of technology, the season and the year when the technology was extended and the
dates when KAP survey will start and end.
13.12.3 Compiling Reports on the Result Obtained
Monitoring and Evaluation

Result: Columns of the numerical result including brief topics:
i.
Percentage of the targeted farmer's groups
ii.
Percentage of farmer using the technology
iii. Percentage of the farmers who understand all the key components
iv. Summary of viewpoints of the farmers who practise things otherwise in spite of being
aware of the technologies.
Analysis: To determine whether the adaptabily of technology is satisfactory or not regarding
the works done, other activities and the excellence of technoloies, its possible benefits for the
farmers and so on. If it is not satisfactory, what is the problems? Does it concern knowledge or
any other reasons and what sort of step are to be taken to solve the problems? Whether to
change the methods of extension work or to exclude the programme, etc., is to be mentioned.
Utilization of KAP Results in Making Decisions or Planning Schemes or Programme
i.
Clear recommendations in regards to necessary measures to be taken towards
improvement of the evaluated technology must be present
ii.
KAP results are required to be used in making annual upazilla proposals
iii. Data regarding varying demands and necessity of different technologies and how
successfully they have been provided should be taken into consideration by the officers.
Before composition of the annual upazilla proposal, if extension workers under DAE receive
the opportunity to read and discuss the KAP result and report, effective measures would
further become possible. This way, any difference in opinion on the obtained results can be
dealt with and various ideas from the workers about how to solve the problems can be
synthesized.
After each KAP survey, a half-day "Opinion Exchange Session" should be planned. Meetings
like these will provide workers with opportunities to exchange experiences regarding KAP
performances and will open a way for improved KAP surveys to be conducted in future.
IAS is an evaluation process of the benefits gained by the farmers from the extension service
provided by the extension workers and its impact in the field. Through an analysis of results
obtained throughout this process, effective measures to improve quality and amount of
extension service can be taken.
13.13 Impact Assessment System (IAS)

Through this evaluation process, progresses of the annual performance agreement process,
e-Extension service and other extension programmes are inspected and the impact of the
extension service can be determined.
The Impact Assessment System (IAS) Report: Form 1 and Impact Assessment System (IAS)
Report: Form 2, which are used in the IAS evaluation process are attached in appendix 8 (1,2).
The following procedures can be followed to manage and compile an IAS report:
i.
IAS report management will be bi-monthly and year-long
ii.
SAAOs, on a fortnightly basis up will submit a filled, IAS form 1 in the Upazilla
Agriculture Office and Agriculture Extension Officers will examine them, sign them
and add comments
iii. Upazilla Agricultural Officers will send the targeted bi-monthly report through e-mail
to the Deputy Director’s office after verifying them in person
iv. Additional Deputy Director (Crop) will examine the received bi-monthly report, verify
them, unite all the upazilla reports in IAS form 2 and assure sending them to the
Additional Director (region) in due time
v.
The Deputy Director working under Additional Director will compile the IAS reports
received from districts and submit them to the Field Services Wing
vi. Based on the problems specified in the report, officers in DAE central office, at
regional, district and upazilla levels will take realistic measures to strengthen the
extension procedure.
Monitoring and Evaluation

Agricultural Extension
Strategies in Haor, Hill, High
Barind, Char and South
and South-Western Regions
Chapter

14.1 The Haor Region
It cannot be confirmed exactly when the evolution of haor area and the development of
agriculture in Haor area happened. However, it is estimated that the agricultural developed in
this region in the beginning of the seventh century, although agricultural development in
India was prevailed long ago.
Characteristics of Agriculture and Public Life in Haor
i.
Haor is a unique land of Bangladesh, some special areas of different types or wetlands
ii.
Haor is such more or less round low land which has its own water drainage basin
iii. Round lowland surrounded by rivers
iv. In the dry season, the lower part of the haor contains one or more beels
v.
The beels are connected to the river through canals
vi. Haor areas are lower than the surrounding area
vii. This area goes under 10-15 feet deep water in the rainy season,
viii. The average height of Haor is 2.00 metres to 4.00 metres from sea level.
Boundary of Haor Region and the Situation in Rainy Season
i.
Kishoreganj and Netrakona stand in the western boundary of the haor region, the
mountainous region of India in the north, the higher region of Sylhet in the east and
the higher region of Comilla and Bhairab in the south
ii.
In the rainy season Haor areas go down under the water long before the high ground is
flooded
iii. Usually this area is flooded twice; the first takes place in between April-June
iv. The north borders are flooded with hill water due to unusual flooding; this flood is
known as flash flood
v.
Almost every year only the boro crops are damaged in the rainy season
vi. Secondly, haor areas are flooded with usual flooding.
Affluence of Rice: The First Rice Research Centre in the Subcontinent
Bangladesh In one-fifth of the total rice production comes from the haor region. The haor
region used to be a source of multiple varieties of rice. This is why the first rice research
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High
Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions
Agricultural Extension Manual 263

institute of the subcontinent focusing on the deep-water rice variety was established here.
Named 'Nagura Farm', the research centre was established in Habiganj district back in 1934. It
is now a sub-station of the Bangladesh Rice Research Institute. Most of the deep-water
varieties of rice native to this land are no more.
However, the haor still boasts of having enough varieties of rice. Agricultural Extension
Department and other sources say that except Brahmanbaria, the rest six districts still nurture
at least 72 varieties of rice.
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor Region
i.
In the Haor region it is not possible to do simple tasks like in area with normal
communication management access to digital media such as community radio, mobile
apps, television etc. is needed to get access to agricultural services
ii.
In addition to innovative technologies in the area, small programmes should be
adopted on the basis of local demand
iii. Newly invented varieties of crops need to be introduced in this region
iv. Emphasis should be given on new technology-based modern training system
v.
Floods and water logging or submergence tolerant varieties should be cultivated
vi. Vegetable cultivation in floating methods should be increased
vii. Use of varieties must be increased
viii. Short-term hybrid varieties cultivation should be advised.
Table 5: Local Variety of Rice in the Haor Region
Aman
DudhLaki, DudhSagor, Guarshail,
Gootki, Goair, Beti, Dhola Amon,
Aguni, Asha Mura, Akhnish ail,
Nāgrashāil, Boguralāki, Badāl,
Bālām, Bānshful, Bagdār,
Moynashāil, Lalbadāl, Lotishāil,
Kālisefri, Kālijira, Kārtikshail,
Kārtiavog, Godalāki, Jāmaibhog,
Zāria, Beeroi, Binni, Meehee,
Kheeloi, Chinigurā, Chhirmoin (33
varieties)
Boro
Gochi, Shāil, Lātlee, Abul,
Hashem, Māloti, TulshiMāla,
Bānshful, Āhsān, Lākhāi,
Akhoni, Shāil, Ratashāil,
KhoiyaBoro, DhulāBoro,
Gachhmālā, BeechiBoro,
Dholmegh, Deuri,
Konyashāil, Jamir, Gultihi,
Lolatepi, Pāikichuri, Lyatha,
Forāsh, Tepiboro, Rataboro,
Poshushāil, Binni, Jāgoli,
Hāsherdim (30 varieties)
Aush
Murali, Chingri or
Chengri, Arai,
Dhumai, Shaitta,
Kashia Binni,
Dharial, Kotkotara,
Hasikolmi (9
varieties)
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions

14.2 Hill Region
Agricultural Extension Strategies in the Hill Areas
Rangamati, Khagrachari and Bandarban districts constitute Bangladesh's Hill region which is
one-tenth of the country's total area. Many of the minority ethnic groups (Chakma, Marma,
Tripura, Rakhain, Garo, and Tanjunga) are residing in these regions along with Bengali people.
Each tribe has its own language and culture. Although “jhum” is their original agricultural
profession but modern agriculture has also attracted them. The cultivation of improved
varieties of mango, litchi, malta, pineapple, lemon fruit and local varieties of Bangla banana
and jackfruit gardens have made the hill areas a huge agricultural resource. There is a great
lack of plain agricultural land here. Various crops, including rice and vegetables are planted on
the land in between hills and on the plain land of the river side.
However, jhum, aus, ginger, turmeric and many other fruits are cultivated on the slopes of hills
and on the lower hills.
Extension strategies must be devised considering the culture in agriculture of the tribal
people, their life styles, social systems, ecology, land utilization and agricultural environment
to take the agricultural extension service to the poor tribal people living in the remote hills.
Most tribal people live in groups in the remote hills in various areas (Chakma para, Marma
para, Tripura para). Head of the area is called headman or Karbari. The leading elder of the
Garo is called Songnokma.
The people of the respective community obey their leader and follow the laws/code. They
also obey the UP chairman or member as well as the headman or Karbari.
i.
In this case, relevant SAAOs have to ensure accommodation and office for their
permanent stay in the block and to offer effective agricultural extension services in the
hill areas with the current manpower of DAE.
ii.
Agricultural blocks of the districts in Hill tracks are huge in size where it is hard to reach
due to lack of communication. On the other hand, the people living in the blocks are
also scattered and grouped. It is rugged and time-consuming to reach the fastest
extension service. Therefore, it is necessary to post the Tribal SAAO as far as possible in
tribal into blocks after reducing the block area and increasing manpower.
iii. Headman or Karbari or Songnokma from related blocks or wards should be included
into the extension programme and in addition the UP chairman or ward members
should also be involved in the extension activities.
iv. In collaboration with the Hill District Council, UNDP has set up a PDC in the form of
associations in most of the areas for assistance of the tribal population in the fields of
healthcare, education, agriculture and social development in all unions of the Hill District
which are run by the Zila Parishad's own manpower in a limited way. Besides, some
NGOs and health departments are using these PDCs to implement vaccination, malaria

eradication, maternity services and other healthcare related programmes. SAAOs can
use these PDCs to reach the farmers' doorstep for agricultural extension services.
v.
Communication between farmers and SAAOs will increase if the SAAOs names,
addresses, visit-days, places, times and cell numbers are displayed in the public places
like PDC, Union Parishad Bhavan, Krishak Samity or Club and Fertilizer or Seed Markets
and Pesticides Dealer Stores.
vi. Tribal women are more efficient in agricultural activities; the offices have to emphasize
the participation of women in training, demonstration and field day programme
vii. Most tribal women or men do agricultural work in the field in the morning; to provide
their extension services, SAAOs will have to visit fields and provide services in the
morning
viii. Extension programmes should be set up considering tribal population's agricultural
culture, living conditions and daily needs
ix. Transport facilities are required to facilitate the transportation of SAAO in the block
x.
There should be regular monitoring of SAAO activities
xi.
Tribal people are more interested in cultivating different kinds of fruits and vegetables; so
training programmes should be designed to increase their knowledge and skills in this regard
xii. The initiatives for developing horticulture ,i.e. making fruit gardens are to be taken
xiii. Private nursery owners should be trained to make seedlings or cuttings using improved
methods
xiv. Appropriate measures for expansion of turmeric and ginger production must be taken
xv. Drip irrigation system should be initiated
xvi. Conservation of trough water should be encouraged for irrigation
xvii.The forest area should be increased in the bared lands.
Agricultural Extension Strategies in High Barind Regions
The agriculture system in Barind areas is dependent on rain. The main problem for crop
production is the drought due to irregular rain in the month of Aswin. The average rainfall of
Godagari upazila of Rajshahi district is 1285 mm and 1402 mm in Nitpur village of Porsha
o
upazila of Naogaon district on the south (FAO). The maximum temperature in May is 45 C And
o
the minimum temperature in January is 6 C. 90 percent of the rainfall occurs from the middle
of the month of Jaistha to the middle of Aswin. The soil moisture starts to decrease at the end
of Aswin and most of the land does not have moisture at all in December. Soil becomes very
hard as it is muddy and the rain water flows over the soil instead of entering deep because of
rough or Barind land. In the Rabi season only 150-197 mm water is stored in the depth of 1
metre. Therefore, it is good to cultivate deep rooted and less water-loving crops in the Barind
region and it will be beneficial. The land of the Barind region is comparatively barren or
14.3 High Barind Regions
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions

unfertile. There is only 0.8-1.2 percent organic matter in the soil which is very less compared
to the required 2 percent. The most important nutrient elements of the crops such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sulfur, zinc, boron, molybdenum are very low here. The
upper layer is clay-loamy but the low level is normal clay and acetic (pH 4.8-6.9). The drainage
system of the soil in this area is not good and the water retention capacity is low.
Various types of Transplant Aman like rain-fed long-duration Shorna 5, Gutishorna, Mamun
shorna, Hutra etc. are generally cultivated in the upper Barind area. In some seasons, if the
rainfall is late or little, the soil moisture falls before the rice grain filling which might reduce the
crop production. In some seasons, the soil does not have enough moisture to cultivate robi crops
and crops like wheat, gram, mustard and lentil can’t be sown on time. 55% of 1 lac 60 thousand
hectares of land in the higher Barind region is still fully dependent on rain even after the Barind
Multipurpose Development Authority developed irrigation system by gradually installing deep
tube wells to lift ground water and reforming ponds and kharis to preserve water. Many of these
areas are less likely to be under irrigation because the level of water is very low.
Moreover, the level of water in the region is gradually reducing due to the arbitrarily extraction
of ground water by deep tube well, making water of irrigation water and with low rainfall for
irrigation dependent boro cultivation. There was water in shallow tube-wells twenty years
ago, but in many cases, it is not possible to lift the water now. Most of the land in Sapahar,
Nachole, Godagari, Niamatpur, Porsha, Patnitala and Dhamurhat upazilas remains fellow after
harvesting of Aman. In these areas, it is possible to cultivate three crops by selecting droughttolerant crops and land and increase production by proper management.
The On-farm Research Division of Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute invented alternative
and improved cropping pattern with the financial and technical help of Krishi Gobeshona
Foundation (KGF) by implementing research projects in Godagari of Rajshahi district, Nachol of
Chapai Nawabganj district and Safahar upazila of Naogaon district for last 3 years (2011-2014).
Cropping patterns are as follows:
_
_
i.
Transplant Aman (BINA-7 or BRRIdhan-57) BARRIGom26 or BARIChola-9 or Potato
Mung (BARRIMung-3)
According to the developed cropping pattern, BINA-7 or BRRIDhan-57 with relatively less life
span is planted at the right time. The BRRIdhan-57 variety does not face any damage even if it
does not get rainfall for 14-21 days in the breeding phase. The demand of this variety is more
than the Shorna variety and the value of the rice is at least 100-150 taka more in per maund as
this type of rice is similar to the Jirasail and miniket. It is more tolerant of the kholpora disease
than the Shorna. The labour for harvesting crops is cheaper than peak season.
It is possible to sow potato or heat-tolerant BARRI Gom-26 or BARI Chola-9 at the right time
after harvesting the BRIdhan-57 and BINAdhan-7 varieties of transplant aman rice in the first

week of Kartik. Potato is a major tuber crop in Bangladesh.The area of potato cultivation and
the rate of increasing the production in the higher Barind region is relatively less than other
parts of the country. The area of potato cultivation is increasing on the basis of leasing land in
business purposes with the increasing number of cold storage, although the average yeild in
the higher Barind region is less.
After harvesting wheat or potato in the high Barind region, DAE will adopt motivational
programmes on BARI-6 varieties of Moogdal production from the last week of Falgun to the
first week of Chaitra in kharif-I season. The quantity of organic matter will increase in the soil if
the plant sare mixed with the soil after harvesting the pods of mungbeans and the urea
fertilizer will be saved in the next aman cultivation. It is possible to increase the intensity of
crops through the cultivation in seasonal fallow land and create workplace for indigenous,
unemployed women and children in pod harvesting. Production of 150 to 180 kg can be
obtained in 33 decimal lands if 6 Kg of BARI Chola-9 can be sown in the right time, between the
second week and the third week of Kartik while still there is moisture in land, after being
soaked into 0.05% Zinc Sulphate solution for 12 hours in 33 decimals after harvesting shortduration BRRIdhan-57 variety of T. Aman.
Supplementary irrigation can be done to wheat and short-duration aman rice by storing the
rain water in the pond or water channels in the high Barind region.
For reducing pressure on groundwater DAE will play an effective role in the development of
technology for the commercial cultivation of early hybrid tomatoes, Thai year- Round Guava,
Apple kul, dragon fruit, BARImalta, Bell, Kathbel, late variety Mango (eg BARImango-3,
BARImango-4, Gouromoti), Sazina, Gladiulas flowers etc.. The amount of organic fertilizers
will increase in soil if the thorn-less Mimosa (Mimosa invisa) seeds can be sown in higher
o
Barind fallow land which is out of irrigation facility after soaking in hot water at 52
temperature for 5 minutes following the first rain in March-April and mixing them with soil in
July before transplanting man rice. In Thailand, thorn-less Mimosa with maize as a mixed crop
is cultivated in maize seed production farms to increase soil fertility, keep moisture and
controlling weed.
i.
There is more than 16 percent areas of 110 upazilas and 8-15 percent areas in the 106
upazilas in 31 districts that have char land which is about 1722 km2
ii.
Chars are formed as a by-product of hydro-morphological activity of the river or soil
erosion and accretion of river side. Chars are of two types, - Island char and attached
char. The Island char is made of sand in the river, which is surrounded by water all the
year. This type of char is called temporary char. The attached char is connected to the
main land along with the river. This type of char is called permanent char.
14.4 Char Areas
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions

iii. Cropping intensity in Char areas is up to 150-185% (BBS, 1997). The temporary char is
generally less productive than the main land. One of the main reasons is that the crop
production is hampered by the collapse of the land of char, covered with sand or soil
erosion due to the sudden flood. According to satellite image experts, about 75% of
the chars last for one to nine years and only 10% of the chars last for 18 years or more
iv. The use of char areas is increasing day by day due to human settlement and
cultivation. Although there are adequate river water and underground water in char
areas, but there are very few areas with irrigation facilities. Year-round vegetables and
fruit production programme is being implemented through the Char Livelihoods
Programme (CLF) in homesteads of Kurigram, Gaibandha, Bogra, Sirajganj and
Jamalpur districts with the help of DFID over the past few years following the
Gayeshpur vegetable production model invented by the On-farm Research Dvision of
the Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute.It is to be noted that vegetables and
fruits can be produced all over the year according to the Gayeshpur model for Pabna
and Natore Char areas and the Palima Model for Manikganj.
v.
Farmers are getting low yield of crops due to not using the required balanced
fertilizers, not selecting the suitable high yielding varieties for the area, not using
improved production techniques in the existing cropping pattern of the char areas.
Crop production materials are not available in char area and the farmers lack technical
knowledge. Considering these factors, it is possible to increase the production and
improve the socio-economic conditions of the farmers through the application of
balanced fertilizers in the crop, cultivating high yielding varieties for the area and
applying improved production technologies of crop.
vi. The number of people living in the char is very low. Over 5-6 million people live in chars
including island and costal char areas. Nearly 10 percent of the total land of
Bangladesh are char lands. Parts of more than 100 upazilas from 32 districts in the
country are char areas. People in chars have to survive by fighting with severe river
erosion, floods, droughts, various natural disasters and unemployment. Char areas
are identified as highly poverty prone areas of Bangladesh.
vii. There are many problems and possibilities in char lands. Chars have vast lands and
large population. People are self-sufficient in char lands. However, although we have
made great progress in agriculture, a large proportion of char land is still not utilized
for cultivation. Crop production is very low in chars compared to the other lands due to
lack of appropriate modern agricultural technologies. In order to produce more crops
in char lands, there is no alternative to providing various types of agricultural
assistance, training and agricultural technologies to the farmers.

*Mustard
- Boro Rice
*Ground nut
- Broadcast Aman
*Mustard
- Broadcast Aus
*Lentil - Jute
- T. Aman
*Mustard
- Jute
*Blackgram
- Sesame + B. Aus
*Wheat
- B. Aus
*Sweet Potato
- B. Aus
*Wheat
- Jute
*Lentil
- B. Aus
*Maize
- B. Aus
*Gram
- B. Aus
*Ground nut
- B.Aus
*Aman
- Potato –Mungbean
*Ground nut
- Blackgram
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Char Areas
i.
Arranging seasonal Assistance or Support Programmes by identifying the crops
suitable for the sandy soil
ii.
Emphasizing crop selection in the production of ground nut, sesame, sweet pumpkin,
sweet potato, black gram, khesari, mungbean, sugarcane, maize, onion and garlic
iii. Increase use of low-input technologies
iv. Arrange small irrigation system
v.
Take Initiatives to encourage solar irrigation systems
vi. Help in improving the marketing system
vii. Use of floating methods
viii. Use of short-duration aman rice varieties
ix. Using early variety crops
x.
Providing frequent training on new technologies
xi. Arranging technology extension to the farmers through establishing contact through
mobile phones
xii. Placing special focus on rabi crops
xiii. Creating skilled assisting or supportive farmer groups
xiv. Shifting to e-extension service.
List of Main Suitable Cropping Patterns for Char Areas
i.
The total area of riverine and agriculture-based Bangladesh is 1,47,570sq km, 20% of it
is coastal areas and 30% is net cultivable areas. There are about 0.85 million hectares
of cultivable land among 2.85 million hectares of coastal areas. The density of coastal
population is less than the other parts of the country (750/km). The amount of per
capita land in the country is 0.79 acres but the amount of per capita land on the coastal
area is 0.72 acres (BBS, 2010). Apart from this, the amount of land for homestead in
the coastal area (0.07 acres) is less than that of the national level (0.08 acres). Life at
14.5 South and South-Western Regions
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions

the coast is mainly dependent on agriculture. At present, the intensity of crops in
Bangladesh is 191% and in coastal areas it is 133%, which is relatively low. It is possible
to increase the intensity of crops by proper planning and suitable agricultural
technologies on the coast.
ii.
Ten coastal districts of southern Bangladesh Khulna, Satkhira, Bagerhat, Barguna,
Patuakhali, Bhola, Chittagong, Cox's Bazar, Noakhali and Lakhsmipur are very
promising in agriculture in spite of having natural disasters and other risks. According
to the 2011 Census, the total population of coastal districts is 24.6 million, which is
about 6 percent of the total population of the country. The coastal districts adjacent to
the Bay of Bengal are under the agro-ecological zone 13, 18 and 23 and mainly saline
prone areas. According to the survey of Soil Resource Development Institute,
approximately 10.56 lakh hectares of coastal areas of the country are affected by
salinity. Of the ten districts, the total land area is 22.90 lakh hectares of which
cultivable land is 17.04 lakh hectares with the net crop cultivable 15.80 lakh hectares
of land. The cultivable fallow land is 1.31 lakh hectares.
It will be possible to increase the intensity of the crops through the proper use of fallow land in
those districts by following some activities such as-seed production, preservation and
distribution of saline tolerant crops through contact farmers, cultivation of fruits and
vegetables in gher-ail and homestead areas, cultivation of less water loving crops, making of
gardens of suitable fruits (coconut, guava, sapheda, aamra etc.), expanding the cultivation of
high value crops and improving management of local crop varieties. There is a potential for
development in the agricultural system of the districts through the activities of the
development of soil health, irrigation system, marketing system, increas use of the fallow land
and the intensity of the crop, the increase of Aus cultivation, the expansion of the cultivation
of pulses and oil crops etc.
Among the Main Cropping Patterns are:
i.
Boro–fallow-T. Aman relay khesari / mung / felon / chilli / diblingaus-T. mung aman
ii.
Fallow - fallow-T. Aman
iii. Fallow -T.aush-T. aman relay khesari / mung / pepper / wheat sweet potato / potato /
lentil / cholas / maize-aus / jute / mesta / sesame -T.Aman
iv. Boro-fallow -fallow potato / sweet potato / chilli / pumpkin / data / sweet pumpkin/
ladys’ finger / brinjal / cabbage / water melon / fallow-T. Aman
v.
Fallow - mixed aus + B.Aman
vi. Relay fellon / moog –T. Aus-T. Aman
vii. Fallow - diblingAus-T.Aman.
Potential Aspects in the South and South-West
Major Cropping Patterns in the South and South-West

Due to geographical location, agriculture in south and south-western Bangladesh is different
from other plain lands; These areas are far behind in development. Crop production is also
less in this region, the reasons are:
i.
Salinity intrusion
ii.
Lack of salinity-tolerant crop variety
iii. Mismanagement of protecting soil fertility
iv. Unregulated irrigation water
v.
Lack of modern technologies and inadequate use
vi. Similar crop cultivation year after year
vii. Crop damage by natural disaster
viii. Lack of improved seed and balanced fertilizer
ix. Low market management.
i.
Using advanced or local sustainable technologies through enhanching cropping
intensity and crop diversification
ii.
Finding ways to make every farmer attracted to increase the areas of fruits and
vegetables cultivation
iii. Planting lots of trees through environment friendly agricultural extension management;
in particular, taking steps to reduce natural disasters by planting fruit trees
iv. Taking attempts to increase the fertility of land through balanced management of
chemical and natural fertilizers
v.
Encouraging crop production techniques, processing and marketing to help poor
peasants in particular
vi. Focusing on agricultural mechanization
vii. Enhancing the training system on the appropriate crop for the extension workers all
over the year
viii. Using digital media like community radio, mobile apps, television etc. to deliver
agricultural extension services to remote areas
ix. Innovating the salinity-tolerant varieties and spreading them to the farmers quickly
x.
Collecting local seeds (Sathamota / Lalmota) and improving their quality
xi. Taking steps to increase cultivation by controlling saline water
xii. Emphasizing on fruit and vegetable cultivation
xiii. Teaching the farmers about climate change adaptation techniques.
South-Western Agricultural Extension Strategies
Agricultural Extension Strategies in Haor, Hill, High Barind, Char and South and South-Western Regions

xiv. Establishment of Community Collection and Marketing Centres
xv. Providing training for women on income generation in agriculture-based issues
xvi. Taking activities for cultivating vegetable, rice and fish farming following Sorjan method
xvii.Increasing cultivation of submergence-tolerant varieties in the Aman season
xviii.Providing training to farmers about climate adaptation strategies
xix. Taking steps to inform the farmers about bad weather forecasts regularly by E-
Extension Service (mobile call or messaging)
i.
Production, preservation and distribution of seeds of saline-tolerant varieties (rice,
wheat, mung, sesame, mustard etc.)
ii.
Fruit and vegetable cultivation extension programme on the boundary of fish farm
Gher and Homestead
iii. Extension Programmes for the obsolete fruit plant (Kaufol, Daoya, Latkon, Lemon,
Sharifa` etc.)
iv. Gardening programme for coconut, amra, guava, malta, shafeda
v.
High value crops (summer tomatoes and beans, kul, papaya, soybean, coconut,
sunflower etc.) cultivation Extension Programme
vi. Vegetable and fruit production programmes through the Sorjan method
vii. Crop Production Technology Extension Programmes, regarding the cultivation of crops
through zero tillage, pits and mulching practices
viii. The palm, dates and Sajina gardening programme on both sides of the road
ix. Vegetable seed production programme in floating bed through modern technologies
x.
Programmes to meet the demand of emergency irrigation through reforming the
water reservoirs or Khas ponds and other ponds for the conservation of rain water
xi. Increase use of renewable energies by establishing solar irrigation pumps
xii. AWD, SRI, raised bed (in rice field) demonstration setting programmes
xiii. Decrease irrigation waste and reduce irrigation costs by establishing Burried Pipe
xiv. Placing drip irrigation demonstration in fruit gardens
xv. Distribution programmes of rice transplanter, riper, power thrasher etc among the
farmers with subsidy cost for agricultural mechanization
xvi. Take supportive activities for post-harvest management and marketing activities of
crop or fruit-vegetables.
Proposed Components for Agricultural Extension in the South-West

Role of Agricultural
Extension in Climate Change
Chapter

Bangladesh is prone to natural disasters. The repercussions of these disasters are very severe
due to the geographical location of Bangladesh, population density and agriculture-based
economy. Developing countries like Bangladesh are most vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change. Rise in global warming lead to increasing sea levels and causing an imbalance
in the climate of the region. Climate change, rising of sea level and climatic disasters can be
identified as effects caused by human actions. Climate change is closely related to crop
production. Climate change affects agriculture output. Bangladesh is also at risk of extreme
weather conditions such as droughts and floods. At this pace, there might be more damage to
agriculture in future if disaster-reduction measures are not taken up at all levels of agricultural
extension and applied at the right time. Although natural disasters cannot be avoided, it is
possible to reduce their impact on the agriculture sector by adopting proper planning and
implementation of protective measures.
Global climate is changing gradually and continuously. There are two main reasons for climate
change:
a.
Natural causes
a.
Man-made causes
i.
Changes in the relationship between the sun and the earth
ii.
Fluctuations of energy produced from the sun
iii. Changes in energy stored in seawater and oceans
iv. Volcanic erosion
v.
Impact of El Ni o and La Ni o.
i.
Adverse effects on the environment due to pollution caused by factories, transport
and vehicles
ii.
Increasing consumption of fossil fuels.
15.1 Causes of Climate Change
15.1.1 Natural Causes
15.1.2 Man-made Causes
ñ
ñ
Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change
Agricultural Extension Manual 277

iii. Increasing emission of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
iv. Increasing emission of poisonous methane gas form swarage and city waste
v.
Nitrous oxide gas emission in various agricultural activities
vi. Use of CFC Halon, Freon gas in freezers, refrigerators and industrial factories
vii. Increasing density of methane and Ozone gas in the atmosphere
viii. Carbon-dioxide emission from coal mines.
i.
Rise in annual temperature
ii.
Increasing salinity or decreasing soil fertility
iii. Unpredictable rainfall
iv. Crop damages due to flash floods
v.
Droughts throughout the country, especially in the northern part
vi. Changes in temperature and duration of winter
vii. Increasing sea levels
viii. Increasing frequency and intensity of natural disasters
ix. Changes in seasonal cycles (exceptions in times when the season starts).
Extension workers will undertake the following activities in the face of a disaster:
i.
Develop a pre-disaster strategy
ii.
Develop a preventive strategy
iii. Develop ways to mitigate the effects of the disaster
iv. Develop an emergency relief system
v.
Prepare and implement emergency rehabilitation programmes.
15.2 Effects of Climate Change in Bangladesh
15.3 Emergency Disaster Management Actions for Extension
Workers
15.4 Keeping Emergency Support Functional During Disasters
Step-1: Early Warning
Disaster precautions means sending out messages or information about the following topics
to individuals or groups in order to deal with possible disasters in the light of past experience:
Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change

ii.
What to do to avoid or reduce danger
iii. Information regarding prevention and preparation.
i.
Assess the situation, set the objective
ii.
Prepare alternative arrangements
iii. Implement activities based on objectives and viability
iv. Determine the demand of materials in the affected areas and prioritize the activities.
The agricultural rehabilitation programme will be taken up as part of short and long-term
activities for the people in disaster-prone communities. The Department of Agricultural
Extension will take immediate initiatives to assist people of the area in collaboration with
other concerned departments and NGOs. In addition, the government will also take measures
for income generating activities for the affected people.
Natural disasters caused by climate change such as heavy rainfall, floods, flash floods,
drought, increased water salinity, cyclone etc. are causing damages to the agricultural sector.
It is possible to reduce the risk by adopting different types of agricultural techniques that can
adapt to the adverse climatic conditions.
It is possible to reduce crop loss if appropriate measures can be taken during, before and after
the disaster caused by climate change.
Climate change is increasing day by day. Alongside this, adverse effects on agriculture are also
increasing. Rice and jute seeds cannot be sown on time due to delays in preparing the land in
i.
Information regarding the risks of disaster, what to do in an alarming situation
Step-2: Determination of Needs and Losses
Step-3: Emergency Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme
15.5 Reduction of Disaster Risks and Climate Change Impacts on
Agriculture via Adaptation Techniques and Management
15.6 Actions Required During Pre- and Post-Disaster Times
15.7 Necessary Actions for Agriculture During Drought

drought of April-May. Additionally, aman seeds cannot be sowed on time if rainfall is low in
June-July. The drought in October-November reduces the rice production severely. In this
situation, crop loss can be reduced if suitable measures can be taken before, during and after
the drought period.
i.
Making use of appropriate irrigation equipments- such as doun and shauti etc.
ii.
Preparing organic fertilizer ahead of time which improves the soil’s water holding capacity
iii. To raise the land boundary, so that it can hold more rain water
iv. To reform canals and ponds and dig mini-ponds for alternative irrigation
v.
To select suitable crops and varieties of crops.
i.
After harvesting Aman rice, cultivating Rabi crops such as gram, linseed, barley, Foxtail
millet etc., while the land is still wet.
ii.
Provide necessary irrigation to crops
iii. Use ribbon pipes to prevent the waste of irrigation water
iv. Repair and elevate the land boundary
v.
Take care of vegetable gardens in the homestead
vi. Provide regular irrigation following the AWD method
vii. Produce seedlings on dry seed bed in time
viii. Produce seedlings using the pond water in a suitable place
ix. Apply mulching to save moisture.
i.
Evaluate previous work
ii.
Prepare the next plan at the community level.
Sometimes, due to the advance flooding, there takes place huge loss of boro, aus, jute, and
transplant aman seed bed, broadcast aman and other vegetables in the field. Although
remedy is not possible but damages due to floods can be reduced by taking effective
measures.
15.7.1 Crop Cultivation before Drought
15.7.2 Crop Cultivation During Drought
15.7.3 Crop Cultivation after Drought
15.8 Actions Necessary in the Event of Flood and Flash Flood
Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change

15.8.1 Crop Cultivation before Flood and Flash Flood
15.8.2 Crop Cultivation during Floods and Flash Floods
15.8.3 Crop Cultivation after Flood and Flash Flood
and store in the house after threshing when 80 percent of the crops are ripened
ii.
Cultivate early or short-duration rice varieties (e.g BINA-7, BRRIdhan 28, BRRIdhan 33
and BRRIdhan 39) which can be harvested before flood comes.
i.
In flooded areas, sow seeds of late varieties such as Binashail, BR 22, BR 23 or local
aman on flood free high land till the end of August
ii.
Collect seedlings from flooded area and plant those in flood free high land in very high
density. This is known as 'Bolan' method
iii. Make floating seedbed with mud on banana tree or mat and sow the seeds and
prepare for the next time
iv. If there is shortage of dry land during the flood, raise seedling of winter vegetables in
advance on tub, soil pot, wooden box, drum, floating water hyacinth and banana rift.
i.
If the seedlings survive the flood wash clay soil lain on the leaves, by sprinkling water or
cutting the leaf
ii.
Fill the blank or empty spaces of the land by the seedlings from other side, specially in
partially damaged lands
iii. As soon as the flood water goes down, broadcast seeds of different varieties of grass,
including maskalai, khesari, and corn on the banks of the river, on the banks of the
dams and fellow land in the char areas.
i.
If there are aus or boro rice in the field during floods and flash floods, harvest the crops
15.9 Measures to be Taken for Agriculture in Saline-Prone Region
Duration of Salinity: Soil salinity increases due to sinking of the land directly in saline water
during monsoon (June to October) and saline water under the soil flows to the surface
through capillary in the dry season (November to May) which damages the soil fertility.
Generally, the level of salinity increases in the beginning of the dry season in November. The
amount of salinity increase on the surface is due to lack of soil moisture and it is the highest in
April-May.

The southern regions of the country are prone to salinity. Tides, increased salinity, rise in
temperature, irregular rainfall, etc. affect the agriculture in this area. It is still possible to produce
profitable crops all over the year by fighting the salinity through planned cultivation and care.
15.9.1 Action Required in Crop Cultivation before Salinity
15.9.2 Action Required in Crop Cultivation During Salinity (November to May)
ii.
Production of 'Sadamota' variety of local rice seedlings in the first week of Shravana
iii. Store rainwater in ponds and canals
iv. Use PVC and ribbon pipes for supplementary irrigation
v.
Keep the soil moisture by placing mulching on the top of the soil with straw, leaf, weed,
water hyacinth so that the capillary rise of saline water can be prevented.
vi. Cultivation of mustard and blackgram without tillage
vii. Prepare the beds for cultivating vegetables and fruits using in the “Sorjan” method
where the water is stored.
viii. Early sowing of watermelon, pumpkin, and cucumber, ridge gourd, bitter gourd etc. in
holes so that it doesn’t get damaged due to drought.
i.
The land should be cultivated after harvesting the Aman rice, by this time the soil
moisture will dry less and the soil will be less saline affected, broadcast Khesari before
cutting Aman in coastal region
ii.
Cultivate mustard, mungbeans, khesari, soybean, gram, felon beans
iii. Preserve water in different reservoirs to prevent salinity
iv. Irrigation through the tape pipe through the LLP
v.
Weaving wheat till mid-November
vi. Planting maize on sandy-loamy or clay-loamy soil
vii. Cultivating tomatoes, and sweet pumpkin in the boundary
viii. Sow watermelon, pumpkin, and cucumber, gourd, etc. in advance in crop holes so that
it doesn’t get damaged from salinity
ix. Reduce the waste of stored water, cultivate mada crops such as bitter gourd gourd,
watermelon etc.
x.
Keep rainwater in ponds and canals
xi. Use mulching by straw, leaves, weeds, water hyacinth to keep the soil moist
xii. Preserve water by making holes in one corner of the ground.
i.
Cultivate salt-tolerant aman rice such as BRRIdhan 47, BRRIdhan 53, and BRRIdhan 54
Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change

15.9.3 Crop Cultivation after Salinity
15.10.1 Effects of Floods on Agriculture
15.10.2 Impact of Drought on Agriculture
seeds from tide or rain water
ii.
Grow seeds on floating seed beds if there are no other places to prepare the seed beds
of T. Aman due to the tidal or rain water, Dapog method can also be used
iii. As the crop can be cultivated within Kartik-Agrahayan months, cultivate Transplant
Aman (BRRI 33, BRRI 39, BRRI 40, BRRI 41, BRRI 44) instead of the late Aman to reduce
the crop loss.
iv. Collection and use of PVC and tape pipe for supplementary irrigation
v.
Early varieties of Aus or Jute should be cultivated so that the crop can be harvested
before the tide or rain water comes.
Generally, there are four types of floods in Bangladesh
i.
Due to Extreme rain: the water coming from the upstream country
ii.
Seasonal flood: caused by the big river
iii. Flash flood: caused by mountainous water
iv. Coastal winds: Cyclones and tidal waves.
i.
Crops and seeds are destroyed due to floods
ii.
Farmers are forced to sell land, animals and other resources due to flood
iii. Farmers are forced to take extra loans due to loss of livestock.
i.
Disruption in growth and stunted growth in rice during October
ii.
Problem in preparing land for cultivation, increased salinity of lands
iii. The shallow bunch varieties are more damaged due to the drought
iv. Impact on sandy soil
v.
Lack of irrigation water.
i.
Prepare seedbeds of aman rice, vegetables and other crops at high levels to protect
15.10 Effects of Flood, Drought, Salinity and other Calamities on
Agriculture

15.10.3 Damaging Effects of Increasing Salinity on Agriculture
15.10.4 Harmful Effects of Increased Global Warming and Cold Wave on
Agriculture
Salinity is a big problem in agriculture in the southern part of the country. Soil salinity is
increasing due to climate change and decreasing of the flow of Monsoon Rivers. In coastal
districts like Barguna, Patuakhali, Bhola, Pirojpur, Jhalokati and Barisal, plane lands are
influenced with high and low tides. The northern parts of these places have saline water. The
intrusion of salt water is a serious problem.
Harmful impacts on agriculture are given below:
i.
Increasing salinity is harming the industries and factories in coastal areas, residents of
the area lack necessary drinking water
ii.
In future, the salinity of water and soil in the coastal areas will increase; more water
will enter the islands in river estuaries and the adjoining areas
iii. Increasing salinity in water and soil will harm total coastal environment, the coastal
economy will be harmed, lives of the local people of the area will be hampered
iv. Increasing salinity of soil through entering saline water has created a serious problem
in the southern part of the country
v.
In the dry season, saline water mixes with fresh water through regular marine tidal
flows and making the river water ineligible for irrigation to aus and other advance
Kharif crops.
In the last 25 years of record on weather temperatures, it is seen that the average
temperature of Bangladesh didn’t increase. It is however feared that the average temperature
may rise by 1 degree Celcius in 2030, 1.40 degrees Celcius 2050 and 2.40 degrees Celcius in
2100. The warm and cold waves increased even though the temperature did not increase in
recent times. Winter period is gradually diminishing in Bangladesh.
Hazardous Effects on Agriculture:
i.
Growth of most of the Rabi crops will be hampered and their yields will be affected. In
addition, more sensitive crops such as wheat production fall if it is not sufficiently cold
during the winter season. Wheat production will become non-profitable
Role of Agricultural Extension in Climate Change

o
ii.
For rice production, if the temperature is 35 C Celsius or higher during flowering or
pollination, the rice grain will be unfilled and production will reduce, which would
ultimately reduce total production
iii. If the temperature decreases below 12°C at night, and below 25°C during the day
immediately after the “Kaich Thor” of the paddy field and it continues for 4/5 days, the
rice will be partially or completely unfilled
iv. Rice cultivation is affected when the average temperature of the air falls below 20°C in
the breeding phase
v.
There are adverse effects on the crops such as mustard, lentil, gram etc. if there is a
sudden drop in temperature causing pollination to not take place properly
vi. Many crops, especially wheat, are affected partially or total in pollination and
fertilization due to long standing fog with cold wave. Insect attacks might also increase
vii. Increasing heat causes increased transpiration of the trees, which results in lack of
irrigation water. Mango buds are spoiled and coconut production is hampered as a
result of the cold wave
viii. Cultivation of Rabi crops is hampered.

Participation of Women in
Agricultural Extension
Chapter

16.1 Introduction
16.2 Gender Discrimination: Global and Bangladesh Perspectives
About half of the population in Bangladesh are women. Women empowerment is a
precondition for national development. It is necessary for establishment of equal rights and
opportunities for women in every sphere to ensure the national development. However,
women have always been subjugated through suppression, lack of knowledge, social
superstitions and religious orthodoxy in a male dominated social system. Women receive little
acknowledgment for their contributions in their households. They lag behind access to
nutrition, health services, educational opportunities, and finances. In order to reduce the
gender gap, steps have been taken to fight gender discrimination in every sphere of
institutional structures. In line with this view, planning is done to ensure women participation
in economic activities. Department of Agricultural Extension acknowledges participation of
women in agricultural activities. Only by recognizing the role of women in agriculture, tangible
development in agriculture can be ensured and thats hunger and poverty can be eliminated.
Gender inequality is a major set-back for countries that are striving for sustainable economic
development. Gender inequality leads to more economic, social and ecological inequality
which hinders a country’s overall development.
i.
Gender‒ based labour disfribution: daily work, responsibilities, etc.
ii.
Disgraceful situation: no right to wealth, choice, empowerment, dicision making etc.
i.
In most countries, women work twice more than their male counterparts without
wage or payment
ii.
Women in developing countries work 31-42 hours a week without being paid
iii. For labour intensive work women get three-fourths of the wages in comparison with
the male workers.
iv. For less labour intensive work women make 50% less than males.
a.Gender Discrimination
Gender discrimination takes place in the context of culture, caste, religion and class. It
generally occurs in two fields:
b. Situation in Gender Discrimination
Participation of Women in Agricultural Extension

Participation of Women in Agricultural Extension
v.
Parliamentary seats for women are about 10-13, although half of the total number of
voters are women
vi. In most African countries women do 80% of the total agricultural work
vii. A staggering population of women in the world are illiterate and live in extreme poverty
viii. 80% workers in the South East Asian export processing zone are women
ix.
x.
xi. Household works that are done by women are not considered as the economic
activities; invisible contribution worth eleven trillion dollars is lost from the world
economy in this way
xii. Despite having many progressive laws in many countries to protect women’s interest,
they are still deprived of basic rights and opportunities
c. The Lifestyle of Bangladeshi Women
i.
Women do unpaid household chores
ii.
Women are financially dependent on the male members of the household
iii. Women are devoid of equal calorie intake from a very early age
iv. Women are restricted to the house
v.
vi. Women’s well-being depend on their husbands after their marriages
vii. Women have limited mobility
viii.
ix. Women have no say in family planning
x.
Polygamy is reserved for male members only
xi. Women are tortured for dowry
xii. Female get moharana late and males get dowery readily
xiii. Property inheritance favours the male members of the family (though an exception in
the Garo ethnic community)
xiv. Equal rights to divorce laws are there but not practised
From the above situation, it is evident that subjugation of women is limiting their ability to
contribute to the development of the country at their fullest potential. In a recent
publication by World Bank it was stated that special opportunities have to be given to women
for greater development of a country. Investment in women’s education and health
positively impacts the economy of a country. There are scopes for women to play a major role
in the agriculture sector.

16.3 National Agriculture Policy and Female Farmers
16.4 Policy for Advancement of Women in the Agriculture Sector
Women’s participation in the agricultural sector is important in the context of socioeconomic development of Bangladesh. The following activities can be adopted to ensure
greater participation of women in agriculture and reduce their need to migrate to the cities in
search of work:
i.
Post-harvest activities, nursery business, homestead vegetable cultivation,
production of fruits-flowers and vegetables seeds, etc. Necessary training and
availability of funds to enable women to start their business
ii.
To take separate extension activities for women farmers in the light of the national
agriculture extension policy
iii. Undertake research activities to understand the obstacles women face and to take
necessary steps to remove the marked inconveniences.
There are some references interrelated to agricultural and women development in the article
30, 31, 36, and 37 of women development policy.
30.2: To ensure the participation of women in food support attainment process
planning, maintenance and distribution.
30.3: To evaluate and recognize their contributions, roles and labour in ensuring the
food support.
Article 31: Women and Agriculture
31.1: The role of agriculture is important in ensuring economic growth, employment
and food security in the agro-based economy. Women labour and participation
in agriculture is evident all over the world. Women’s participation in agriculture
should be recognized nationally.
31.2:
To assist all the women in agriculture in removing obstacles due to the climate
change and calamities.
31.3:
To ensure the equal wages for women and to remove discrimination for the
women wages in agriculture.
31.4:
To take necessary steps to ensure the equal opportunities for the women
labourers in agriculture for the support of agricultural materials, fertilizer, seeds,
farmer cards and credit facilities.
Article 30: Foods Support for Women
Agricultural Extension Manual 291

Article 36: Women and Environment
36.3:
To give equal rights and encourage women in agriculture, fisheries, rearing
livestock, and forestation.
Article 37: Protection for Women and Children Prior to the Event of and After
Calamities
37.3:
To take necessary steps to prioritize and ensure safety of women during
rehabilitation after calamities and preparing them for challenging the calamities
Female Farmers: All the interested Female farmers related to crop production and work (from
the crops cultivation to the collection, preservation, processing and commercialization of
crops) will be recognized.
Formation of Women's Organization: Formation of women's organizations or strengthening
of existing groups helps to reach a collective group of farmers at a time. This allows the fast
and smooth dissemination of information through the extension workers. The SAAO needs to
facilitate the formation of women's groups and assess the requirements of the female
farmers. Women's access to these services needs to start from the grassroots (village tier)
while ensuring that the existing resources are properly utilised to reach specific development
16.5 Extension Approaches for Strengthening Women's
Participation in Agriculture
16.6 Extending Services to Female Farmers
Department of Agricultural Extension will determine service recipient (target group), select
proper technology or extension service and transfer technology through appropriate methods.
Services for Women: Women’s participation to the activities of agricultural extension,
marketing and production has to be ensured to increase empower their decision making in the
economic activities. With this in view, women have to be assisted with training on agricultural
extension technologies, information related to market, agricultural productive skills and
methods. Women extension workers can play a vital role in these activities. Therefore, the
opportunities for participation of women extension workers have to be increased.
Distribution of crop production inputs have to be ensured for women farmers in the field
levels. All the female farmers can be taken under the agricultural extension service.
Participation of Women in Agricultural Extension

strategies. In this way, groups or organisations can be formed gradually in the upazila, district
and regional levels. The flowchart below shows the extension services catered to women:
Flow chart: Process of enabling services to women
Leadership Selection: To strengthen women’s participation activities, the extension workers
at the root level have to consider the following aspects:
Increasing Capacity of Women's Organization: The first step towards building capacity is to
locate women’s groups already formed by various NGOs. It is likely to find the groups not very
familiar with modern methods or techniques in agriculture. The agricultural extension worker
has a crucial role to play here. Instead of forming new groups, the extension worker can focus
on the existing groups and training them on modern techniques and practices. Efforts must be
made in facilitating the dissemination of practical knowledge in this rural level. The main areas
of focus at this stage would be to list down what inputs would they need in case of farming or
domestic work, what qualities a person needs to possess to lead a group, and how best to
drive towards results in a democratic way.
Linking Female Farmer Groups and Other Organisations: A coordinating environment has to
be created by the female farmer groups and the other organisations where the skills of
women will be enhanced and a positive attitude towards their participation will be created
through trainings and individual development. As a result, women will be more involved in
crop production, processing and business. Recently, many organisations have addeded target
female farmers in their mainstream activities. Here, there is scope for agricultural extension
workers to make a link between these organisations and female farmer groups.
ii.
To foster a kind and cooperative relationship among leaders and extension workers so
that mutually agreed goals can be fulfilled
iii. The individuals who are interested in the extension work have to be skilled to
understand the problems of female farmers
iv. The individuals who are interested in the extension work have to be made aware of
new technologies that make farming more comfortable
v.
The individuals who are devoid of various facilities geographically should be targeted
vi.
vii. Leaders have to be willing to take part in trainings
viii. Evaluate the standard of the work periodically to ensure the effectiveness of the system.
i.
To consider the farm size, cropping patterns social position of the selected leaders
Formation of
women's
organisations
Selection
of leadership
Capacity
building of
organisation
Coordination
between
similar groups
Attempting
collective
efforts

Taking integrated actions
i.
Development programmes have to be made targeting women by considering their
necessities and capabilities
ii.
Training courses have to be made pertaining to agricultural aspects
iii. It will not be appropriate only to tell or teach them scientific and technical knowledge
in the training; rather emphasis should be given on the needs and interests of rural
women.
iv. Emphasis has to be given on the training based on agricultural technologies
v.
Women’s accrs to the labour market and income generating activities have to be
made easy
vi. Social safety has to be increased and possible risks have to be decreased.
vii. Technologies and services have to be improved, assessing the role of the government,
non-government and individual sectors to remove the impediments existing in the
agricultural sectors.
To conclude, it can be said that emphasis should be given on the following by agricultural
extension workers to ensure better livelihood of women involved in agriculture:
a.
Proportion to income of men-women
b.
Wages of men-women in agriculture
c.
Per head food availability of men-women
d.
Per head standard of nutrition of men-women
e.
Participation of men-women in agriculture.
The above aspects aim to establish equal rights for women to do their professional duties.
Extension workers can do the work of a social worker in this context. In this way, participation
and activities of women in the agricultural sectors will go up and at the same time the
possibilities for sustainable development will be created.
Participation of Women in Agricultural Extension

e-Extension Services
Chapter

17.1 Introduction
The population of agrarian Bangladesh is increasing rapidly. There is no alternative to
increasing the production in the agriculture sectors to meet all the demands for nutrition and
feed the rising population. The contraction of the agricultural land and the gradual decrease
of land fertility are the main impediments. The imbalance of season cycling due to the climate
change is another problem. As a result, irregular rainfall, unnatural mode of temperature and
other adverse aspects are making the situation more complex. To meet these complex
problems, new technologies are invented for agricultural development. The prime challenge
for the Department of Agricultural Extension is to provide the farmers of all levels with these
technologies. To meet the challenge, the Department of Agricultural Extension is determined
to spread and apply all the invented technologies and to popularise the extension service
establishing a close relationship with farmers.
ICT has helped in the rapid spread of activities. The government is also determined to take the
country ahead in the field of ICT. Keeping this in mind, the Access to Information (a2i)
programme is strengthened in every field of development in the country. As a part of this
programme, e-extension services are being improved gradually. Now, it is universally
acknowledged that proper implementation of e-extension services are needed to meet the
demands of the increasing population. A radical change can be observed in the growth of crop
production through the proper e-extension services.
Radio and TV are welknown for broadcasting extension news since a very long time. These are
tools of extension work. The use of audio and video has made e-extension services easier and
more useful. Owing to the advanced technological development, live communication system
has been added to the e-extension service, such as live conversation, live video, video
conference through mobile phones, etc. Recently, mobile apps, social network sites (such as
Facebook) and off-line internet features have played a significant role for developing the
standard of e-extension. In near future, an unprecedented advancement will come into light
in case of agricultural development along with acquiring greater efficiency in e-extension
service programmes.
e-Extension Services
Agricultural Extension Manual 297

17.2 Necessity of e-Extension
17.3 Benefits of e-Extension Services
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) provides services to farmers. DAE promotes
technology-based agriculture for the development of farmers. One of the major
responsibilities of DAE is to give proper solution to farmers regarding production and proper
application of the new technologies all across the country. Agricultural families are increasing
with increasing population in the country. The necessity of e-extension service is given below:
i.
At present, the proportion between extension workers and farmers' families is 1t2500.
ii.
It is difficult for one extension worker to serve 2500 farmers' families
iii. It is very difficult to travel due to the poor communication system and the existing
transportation system especially for extremely remote areas
iv.
It is difficult to inform all classes of farmers of the extension message, especially in the
remote areas
v.
In the present context, there are no alternatives to expand without e-extension
vi. Many farmers are unable to maintain contact with the Agriculture Information Centre
and or theAgriculture Consultant Centre
vii. There are circumstances where there are no proper ways to inform the farmers of the
natural calamities immediately.
In the aforementioned context, proper and fruitful extension services can be ensured only
through the e-extension service.
Digitization has opened the doors to numerous possibilities. Many opportunities in the field
of agriculture have been created through the e-extension service ensuring effective services
to the farmers.
The benefits of the e-extension service are given below:
i.
It is possible always to serve a good number of farmers within a short period of time
ii. e-extension service is cost effective
iii. It is possible to give the service in remote areas easily
iv. It is possible to provide effective solution to farmers because of live samples and direct
communication
v. Farmers can get the service of the e-extension service from the e-extension workers
any time
vi. Farmers can have an opportunity to get cooperation of extension workers at any time.
vii.It is possible to send farmers important news pertaining to natural calamities
viii.It is helpful in case of knowing proper price for the agricultural products in the market
ix. Farmers can get solution for any problems using internet and mobile applications.
e-Extension Services

x. Farmers can improve their from skill enriching their knowledge with the help of
interest, on-line, off-line and mobile apps.
xi. The development of mutual interaction is created among the farmers through social
network groups (such as Facebook).
DAE has given emphasis on the proper delivery of e-extension services. DAE will be ready to
conduct activities concerning the following aspects for the development of e-extension
services:
i.
Skilled manpower creation and recruitment at the headquarter of DAE for the
development of e-extension service activities
ii.
Empowerment for all concerned aspects and arrangement of necessary equipment
useful for e-extension services at the headquarter
iii. Supplying necessary equipment pertaining to proper e-extension services at the field
level
iv. Skill development related to the e-extension service of the extension workers
v.
Selecting farmers and developing their skills for e-extension services
vi. Chalk out programmes to popularize e-extension services
vii. Encourage farmers to use existing facilities of e-extension service
viii. Encourage the farmers to use the existing facilities of e-extension services.
The area of the extension service is being gradually extended and the interests of the farmers
and extension workers are increasing day by day. Enterprising role for the extension
programme is being played by many institutions besides DAE. Description of the existing
facilities related to the e-extension service is given below.
Radio and TV broadcast various farmers’ need based and recreational agricultural
programmes for a long time. At present, national and local agricultural programmes are being
broadcasted from the radio stations of Bangladesh. Besides these centres, there are 17
community radio programmes. With the increasing popularity of TV, the listenership of radio
17.4 DAE's Considerations for e-Extension
17.5 The Existing e-Extension Eervices
Use of Radio and TV

has reduced. Agricultural programmes and news of various natural calamities broadcasted in
radios play an important role in the activities of e-extension service. The popularity of TV is
very high. The number of TV channels is also increasing day by day. Every channel broadcasts
agricultural programmes and contributes to the extension service. TV channels also broadcast
agriculture news. Extension workers will play a role to attract and inform farmers of
agricultural programmes of TV and radio.
The use of audio or video in the extension service activities has been done for a long time. Use
of audio clip of information on important agricultural message or information in seminars and
farmers training is being expanded.
Now-a-days, mobile phones are an important and popular means of communication. Nearly
100 per cent of the population has access to mobile phones. In recent times, the usage of
mobile phones has increased due to their falling prices. Also, affordable internet is helping
smart phones gain increased popularity.
Direct Communication: Many farmers use mobile phones to reach extension workers and
take their suggestions and support relating to agriculture. The extension workers also make
use of the mobile phones to reach farmers to inform farmers about the use of new
technologies and provides them required advice. This direct communication is beneficial for
quick access to services and during emergencies such as natural disasters.
Information through SMS: Dissemination of short message through SMS is very popular. In
giving or receiving extension services, both the extension workers and farmers can use SMS.
Besides text message, voice messages can also be sent carrying important messages.
Real-life sampling, live video message etc. through mobile or smart phones can give effective
and tangible leverage to e-extension works.
Use of Audio or Video
Use of Mobile or Smart Phone
e-Extension Services

Use of Tablet PC
Tele or Video Conference (Conversation)
Benefits of the Internet
Social Media
The use of tablet PC is limited to the e-extension service programme. The use of tablet PC and
mobile phones are the same. The service of tablet PC will be very helpful to serve farmers in
groups.
Effective extension service can be provided through tele or video conference (conversation)
with the farmers groups. High officials of the DAE also can take part in the service of the
extension programme by using tele or video conference at the head quarter.
Due to the introduction internet data services, internet can be accessed from anywhere. As a
result, anyone can access websites, mobile apps, etc. from any place and at any time and can
acquire the knowledge of the agricultural extension activities.
Recently, social networks especially Facebook have earned popularity among the people of
every age and level in Bangladesh. Through these networks, posting, writing, picture and
video sharing, individual thinking can be expressed and shared with others.
The use of social media by farmers and officials of the Department of Agricultural Extension in
their service can be very effective to disseminate agricultural information. Farmers will be
benefitted if agricultural information or advice is posted from the Facebook accounts of the
extension officers. As a result, the extension of technology in agriculture will be faster.
Meanwhile, a Facebook account has been launched from the head quarter of the
Department of Agricultural Extension. The account will be accessible from the website of
DAE. An opportunity for sending and receiving the extension service has been created from
the account. The Facebook groups among the farmers of their respective areas at upazila and

district levels under DAE will play a conducive role for expanding the service. The number of
YouTube users is increasing. YouTube can be can be considered as a tool for the extension
service.
Call centre is a medium by which a mutual communication can take place between the serving
institutions and their consumers. To expand the latest technologies in agriculture, a call centre
called “Krishi Call Centre” operated by Agriculture Information Service has been established
under the Ministry of Agriculture in 2012.
It is located at the head quarter of Agriculture Information Service in Khamarbari in Dhaka.
The activities of the centre have formally been introduced anew from the month of June,
2014. The call centre hotline is 16123 and the call rate per minute is 25 paisa (excluding VAT
and tax) according to the regulations of BTRC. There are 5 executives specializing on
agriculture, fisheries and livestock at the call centre. Farmers can get immediate advice from
specialists on agriculture, fisheries and livestock by dialling 16123 from any mobile phone
operator. The call centre is open every day except Friday and other government holidays from
9 am to 5 pm.
AICC is an ICT based information service centre run by farmers. At the village level, AICC is run
by the members of Agriculture Information Service. Use modern and latest information
technology is introduced in these centres. Farmers themselves provide and collect
information service in the AICCs established at the village level. In these centres, various ICT
devices like desktop computers, laptops, printers, internet modems, multimedia components
have been provided. Besides, training of the members of AICC has been provided side by side.
From the Agriculture Information Service, the advice of the specialist is given to the receivers
through online video conference. As a result of this, an opportunity has been created to
expand the information technology among the marginal farmers. Now, information service
activities are being run by 499 centres all over the country.
Touch-screen kiosk is one of the media where a lot of agricultural information, audio, video
content etc can be shared with farmers. A user can get his or her desired content from the
kiosk without anybody’s help. In the software,various e-books, video contents, audio
Agriculture Call Centre
Agriculture Information and Communication Centre (AICC)
Touch-Screen Kiosk
e-Extension Services

contents, AICC data base etc. have been installed. Besides these features, high speed
internet connection has been given to these kiosks. The interested farmers or any user can
get the necessary information on agriculture from these kiosks. If needed, they can also print
them out. Kiosks are being used at the local offices and the head quarter of Agriculture
Information Service.
Union Digital Centres are established at all the unions of the country. They provide an
opportunity for the common people for accessing diversified government services. Farmers
can get their desired services from the UDC entrepreneurs responsible for the centres. In the
service activities, SAAO helps the UDC entrepreneurs with their utmost efforts.
e-farmer (www.ekrishok.com) is an attempt to provide e-extension services. e-farmer service
is based on information technology in the context of agricultural extension and market
management. Farmers can get service from the local “Batighor” centre or e-farmer service
centre through a local enterprise on dialling 16250 directly.
The oldest and historical magazine of Bangladesh is “Masik Krishi Katha”. The magazine, since
1939, publishes articles related to the field of agriculture, horticultural agriculture, fisheries,
livestock, forest, nutrition, environment, processing, marketing, storage etc. The magazine
has been turned into an e-book to spread it among all the people. Now anyone can read the
magazine like the printed one.
To present the methods of crops cultivation technology of various types in the form of the
pictures on audio video, a multimedia e-book has been created by AIS. The benefit of this
service is that anyone can store the information in a pen drive and read them digitally. At the
same time, they can see them in the form of video.
Union Digital Centre (UDC)
e-Farmer
Digital Krishi Katha
Multimedia e-Book

Use of Websites
Agricultural institutions have their own websites. Each website is a storehouse of knowledge
on technology. They are an important source of extension service. The extension worker can
increase the interest of the farmers by using their websites. The web addresses of some
important institutions related to agriculture are given below:
i.
Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE): www.dae.gov.com
ii.
Agriculture Information Service (AIS): www.ais.gov.com
iii. Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation(BADC): www.badc.gov.com
iv. Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council(BARC): www.barc.gov.com
v.
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute(BARI): www.bari.gov.com
vi. Bangladesh Rice Research Institute(BRRI): www.brri.gov.com
vii. Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture(BINA): www.bina.gov.com
viii. Soil Research Development Institute(SRDI): www.srdi.gov.com
ix. Bangladesh Jute Research Institute(BJRI): www.bjri.gov.com
x.
Seed Certification Agency(SCA): www.sca.gov.com
xi. Bangladesh Sugar Corps Research Institute(BSRI): www.scri.gov.com
xii. Barendra Multipurpose Development Authority(BMDA): www.bmda.gov.com
xiii. Cotton Development Board(CDB): www.cdb.gov.com
xiv. Department of Agricultural Marketing(DAM): www.dam.gov.com
xv. Hortex Foundation: www.hortex.org
xvi. Department of Fisheries: www.dof.gov.bd
xvii.Livestock Department: www.dls.gov.bd
Some more website addresses related to agriculture:
i.
www.kinowledgebank.irri.com
ii.
www.riceworld.org
iii. www.plantproduction.co.nz
iv. www.pestweb.com
v.
www.maize.gov
vi. www.fao.org
vii. www.agroatlas.ru
viii. www.ag.ndsu.edu
e-Extension Services

17.6 Website of Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE):
www.dae.gov.bd
There are some important service boxes in the website of DAE and a link has been added for
the information pertaining to crops production. These boxes can contribute to the extension
service to the farmers by giving them information on the latest technologies.
The services of the boxes are given below:
i.
Due to the update system for the service box information, appropriate and updated
information can be learnt
ii.
An attempt to understand the subject matter explaining the real situation through
pictures and video specifically
iii. Extension workers can enrich their knowledge at the ease of their home
iv. Provide necessary information any time
v.
If the farmer is not able to use these websites, they can take the help of NGO workers,
sellers or dealers of fertiliser or pesticides, UDC entrepreneurs or any person
knowledgeable in this aspect
vi. Its use is inexpensive and time consuming
vii. Service boxes are open to all always. As a result, many extension workers will be
benefitted by the service
viii. It is very useful to get full service sitting home at the backward areas
ix. It will be convenient to get the standard service
x.
The necessity of printing will be decreased
xi. The opportunity for crops diversification will be increased
xii. It will protect nature and environment.
Description of these aspects of getting extension service from the Department of Agricultural
Extension websites is given below.
The subjects included in the e-extension service box are the followings
i.
Farmer Digital Address is an android mobile application, an offline software and a web
portal (xavier.itreatise. comev qais.ml). In this service, there are production and
management systems of 120 kinds of crops, use of advanced technology in
17.6.1 e-Extension Service
Farmer Digital Address

agriculture, information on insect and disease management and control. All the
information from sowing the seeds to harvest has been put in Farmer Digital Address.
Subsequently, a detail description of post-harvest management system has also been
given to the address.
a. Crops Production System
i.
Various kind of information based on variety of crops and seasons with pictures that
will be considered for the selection of farmers desired crops and variety
ii.
Technology or technique for plantation and sowing
iii. Application method and dosage of fertilisers immediately through auto calculator
iv. Intercultural operations of crops
v.
Crop harvesting and post-harvest management.
b. Insects and Disease Management of Crops
i.
Real pictures of insects and diseases of crops and symptoms of the attack and damage
so that they can be controlled
ii.
Controlling system for insect and diseases of crops by applying the IPM method
iii. Chemical control methods– introduction to insecticides, proper prescription and
application of insecticides.
c. Introduction and Application of Advanced Technology of Crops
i.
Information concerning the advanced technology of crops
ii.
Description of technology with pictures and videos.
Farmers’ Window or Krishaker Janala)
‘Farmers’ Window’ is a digital platform that attempts to give immediate and proper
solution of problems related to deficiency of fertilisers, diseases and insect attacks on
crops. At present, there are more than thousands of problems in over 120 different
kinds of crops. Real and representational pictures based on crop problems have been
logically arranged in Farmers’ Window. By seeing these pictures, farmers can identify
the primary problems in their crops. By referring to the pictures of identified problems
and observing their symptoms, farmers can mark the actual problems. The farmers
can understand the solution and take the right steps to solve their problem.
e-Extension Services

The special benefit of using Farmers’ Window is its user-friendliness. The software
presents precise information. It uses pictures to help farmers easily identify their
problems. Besides this, it has other features such as frequently asked questions,
news, etc.
The website can be accessed through smart phones by visitinghttp://www.infokosh.gov.bd/krishokerjanala/home.html
e-Prescription on Pesticides
A pesticide prescription application (software) has been developed incorporating all
the types of pesticides approved in Bangladesh. For the treatment of any disease or
insect-infested crop, the agricultural extension worker can easily issue the right
prescription by accessing the application using their mobile phones and accessing the
webpage. Farmers can benefit from the application by using it themselves.
The pesticide prescription application offers several effective pesticide options or
groups upon entering the names of the specific pest and affected crop. From there, the
application gives information on the commercial names of the pesticide options and
their producing company. From there the farmers can choose their pesticide. The
effective use of the application in controlling crop pests is expected to enforce the use
of right pesticide in right amount and minimize the use of adulterated pesticides.
The application can be used through other means besides the website of DAE. The
application can be downloaded from the google play store using a smart phone. The
application must be regularly updated as the information database is updated
frequently. The website address of the application is pest2bengalsols.com.
The aspects of crop production technology services are given below:
i.
Cereal crops
ii.
Crops related to pulse, oil and spices.
iii. Vegetables and tuber crops.
iv. Fruits, flowers, and cash crops.
The production technology of cereals, pulse, oil and spices, fruits, flowers and cash crops have
been given in detail in the service box.
17.6.2 Crop Production Technology

17.6.3 Assistance for Agricultural Decision
The aspects included in the box of assistance for agricultural decision are the following:
i. Online Fertiliser Recommendation Software
The online Fertiliser Recommendation Software is developed by SRDI. The software
provides recommendation on fertilizers and its usage based on required information.
The recommendation can be printed out .It is easy to use and farmers themselves can
get fertiliser recommendation through the software.
ii. Rice Crops Manager
The software ‘Rice Crop Manager’ is developed by the partnership of BRRI and IRRI. In
this software, farmers get fertiliser recommendation by entering the required data into
the software. There is an opportunity to give the farmers a print copy of fertiliser
recommendation too. Farmers themselves can get their prescription because of the
easy use of the software.
iii. Rice Doctor
‘Rice Doctor’ is developed by an international team of IRRI. It is an application related to
the control and identification of diseases and insects of rice. It is useful for students,
researchers and others. The software can be used through any kind device. There is an
opportunity to download the app in an android mobile phone from the google play
store.
iv. Storehouse for Rice Production Technology
The store house of rice production technology prepared by BRRI is a special kind of
store house of information. The significance of the store house has been increased by
adding the modern rice cultivation, 18th edition, 2015 to it. The description of the
latest varieties of rice invented by BRRI and its production technology is added to the
app. The store house has been enriched with a database programme with a lot of
information.
The names of pesticides and fertiliser approved and registered by the government can
be learnt from the website of DAE. The list is regularly updated. Users can find the link
of the website in other concerned institutions’ websites.
e-Extension Services

17.7 Increase of Farmers’ and SAAO’s Ability for Successful
e-extension Service
Farmers will be devoid of the benefits of the e-extension service until their capabilities of ICT
knowledge increase. Therefore, training activities have to be arranged to increase the
capabilities of farmers and SAAOs from DAE. The training activities will run in two parts; the
first part will be basic training and the other part will be training on advanced ICT.
The following aspects will be included in the fundamental training.
i.
Use of computer
ii.
Internet browsing
iii. Introduction and use of websites
iv.
Use of Microsoft Office software
v.
Use of Android software
vi. Use of smart phone or tablet PC.
Bangladesh is an agriculture based country. Technology is the main force in the growth of
production in agriculture. New technologies are invented to meet the needs of farmers. These
technologies have to be extended among farmers. Popularisation of the e-extension services
and expanding technologies extensively, are required to include more farmers in modern
agriculture. For this reason, greater participation of all extension service workers is required.
DAE considers the e-extension service activities very important and it will be taken as the basic
tool for the extension service activities in near future.

Challenges in
Agricultural Extension
Chapter

18.1 DAE's Measures in Addressing Challenges and the Present
Scenario of the Development of the Agriculture Sector
Climate change, adverse weather conditions and depletion of natural resources poses a huge
challenge to feed the 16 crore people of the country. Alongside this, there are other
challenges such as guarantee of safe food and nutrition, poverty alleviation, employment of
men and women in agriculture sector etc. DAE has addressed these challenges and has
created a unique record in agricultural sector. A glimpse of the progresses in agricultural
development and success is as follows:
In last 44 years' (1971-2015) rice cultivation land has decreased by 18%, although
production of rice increased 3.16 times; land for potato cultivation increased 5.5 times and
the production increased 10.9 times; the production of wheat and maize increased
respectively 12.25 and 7.57 times respectively; land for jute cultivation has reduced by 15%,
the production increased by 15%. (BBS).
In the last one and a half decade (1995-2010), the agricultural production capacity of
Bangladesh has reached the highest among the countries of South and South-East Asia. Total
Factor Productivity (TFP) of Bangladesh is 2.7% which is more than that of China, India,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Philippine, Vietnam (Source: World Bank report).
The contribution of the agriculture sector to rural employment is not remarkable. In the
last ten years (2000-2010) employment in agriculture sector has increased by 21.6%. In the year
2000, employment was 1 crore 87 lakh and in 2010 it increased by 2 crore 27 lakh. According to
the data, in 2013, 39.6% of rural employment was from agriculture (Source: World Bank report).
At present, agriculture is the income source of 87% of rural households. If the
income in agriculture sector increases by 10%, income in non - agriculture sector increases
by 6%. In the last decade (2000-2010) income of rural families from agriculture sector has
increased about two times, in 2000 it was 61,330 crore and in 2010, it rose up to 91,365
crore. (Source: World Bank report).
In the last era, involvement of women in agriculture has increased manifold.
According to a survey of IFPRI 42% of pumpkin and water gourd farmers and 38% of tomato
peasants are women. And 58-71% of paddy threshing, drying, collecting and storing seeds are
18.1.1
18.1.2
18.1.3
18.1.4
18.1.5
Challenges in Agricultural Extension
Agricultural Extension Manual 313

done by women. Moreover, with women empowerment and their involvement in agriculture,
the nutrition level of family and children have developed and the number of disabled children
has decreased.
In the last five years, annual income of families in the manga-affected areas increased
by 120%. In 2008, their income was BDT 35400 which increased to BDT 78000 in 2013. Within
only five years the picture of monga-affected areas has improved and people are able to
afford three meals a day. (Source: PKSF)
Bangladesh is recognized in the eye of the world as a lower middle-income country by
reducing the disrepute of developing or low-income country. Here, development in the
agriculture sector has a big contribution.
DAE has succeeded in dealing with natural disasters. Implementation of agricultural
rehabilitation or incentive programme with the activities of precaution before and motivation
after disaster has helped to recover the damages of disasters.
Success of Bangladesh in the production of fruits is unprecedented. According to the
report of FAO, production of fruits increased by 11.4% and production increased by 10% per
hectare of land between 2000-10. Fruit production rate of Bangladesh is the highest in the world.
According to Pesticide Technical Advisory Committee, reduction of the use of
insecticides and production of safe food through biological and natural management is a big
step forward of DAE. Due to this progress, pesticide imports have been declined nearly by one
third in the last three years.
In "Global Hunger Index- 2015" published by IFPRI, the present success of
Bangladesh in eradicating hunger is double than that of 1990.
Success of Bangladesh in agriculture sectors is imitative in the world. In spite of
comparatively smaller land areas, huge population and insufficient resources, Bangladesh has
gradually increased its food production and increased food security (Source: FAO).
With the objective of tackling the challenges, DAE has ensured continued development in
agriculture. In the meantime more issues such as climate change has added a new dimension
of challenges in extension activities. By capitalizing on past experiences, DAE will be working
hard to firmly face the challenges of future. A brief discussion on main challenges of
agricultural development or extension is as follows.
18.1.6
18.1.7
18.1.8
18.1.9
18.1.10
18.1.11
18.1.12
18.2 Future Challenges in the Development of Agriculture
Challenges in Agricultural Extension

18.2.1 Prevention of Agricultural Land From Converting into Non-agriculture
Sector
18.2.2 Guarantee of Food and Nutrition for Increasing Population from
Gradually Decreasing Arable Land
18.2.3 Changed Climate Risk Management
18.2.4 Turn Southern Region into the Crops Storage by Resisting the Risk of
Salinity
From a statistical standpoint, it can be said that in 1976 agricultural land of the country was
97,61,450 hectares which was decreased by 94,39,541 hectares in 2000 and by 87,51,937
hectares in 2010; that is to say, from 1976 to 2000 annual reduction rate of agricultural land was
13,412 hectares or 0.137% and from 2000 to 2010 it was 68,760 hectares or 0.728% (SRDI).
This is a great challenge in the field of agricultural development. Effective measures should
be taken to prevent agricultural lands from converting to non-agriculture sectors by
motivating agricultural activities and formulating necessary policies. DAE will play a leading
role in this matter.
Population growth rate of Bangladesh is 1.37%, which means every year food and nutrition
has to be ensured for more 22 lakh people. DAE has to make appropriate plans and
programmes to ensure food and nutrition for these large number of extra population from
annually 0.724% decreasing land.
Bangladesh is prone to natural disasters due to its geography. Due to climate change crop
seasons for many crops are affected by various kinds of disasters such as floods, droughts,
variation of seasonal temperature and rain, etc. Efficiency of the employees of DAE in climate
change adaptation and disaster management has to be ensured. DAE has to play an effective
role in preventing and managing increased climate risk through formulating and
implementing appropriate plans or programmes .
Areas of land in the southern region are 27 per cent of total land and one third of arable land
of the country. According to SRDI, the amount of saline land in the southern region was
833000 hectares in 1973 which reduced to 10 lakh 56 thousand hectares in 2009. That is,
salinity is travelling upstream. Generally salinity appears in dry season (February - May). In
addition to salinity in the southern region, irrigation water crisis is bad. All extension
workers of DAE have to be active in plan formulation and their implementation regarding

selection and extension of salinity tolerant crops and crop varieties, introduction of
appropriate cropping patterns, making saline land fit for cultivation though management,
creation and development of irrigation systems, introduction and extension of region wise
specialized cultivation systems, emphasis on cultivation of aus rice and strengthening of its
extension programmes, assortment of large fallow land under plantation in robi season,
floating agriculture etc. And they also have to be promised in making the southern region of
the country as new crops storage.
Gradual reduction of organic matters in the soil is a threat to agriculture. Within limited arable
lands of the country, in 3668000 hectares or in 42% of land areas, the amount of organic
matters is very low. Moreover, due to continuous cultivation of high yielding crops, there is
nutrient shortage of soil and it is a marked crisis in agriculture sector. Already the amount of
land with very low level of phosphorus, potassium, sulphur, zinc, boron, calcium and
magnesium is increased respectively by 37 lakh hectares (about 37% of agricultural land), 27
lakh 20 thousand hectares (about 31% of agricultural land), 33 lakh 1 thousand hectares
(about 38% of agricultural land), 27 lakh 55 thousand hectares (about 32% of agricultural
land), 24 lakh 90 thousand hectares ( about 28% of agricultural land), 3 lakh hectares ( about
4% of agricultural land) and 3 lakh hectares ( about 4% of agricultural land) (Source: SRDI).
On the other hand, acidity of soil of almost every region except Ganga Basin is gradually
increasing and the amount of extreme acidic soil is marked about 39 lakh 58 thousand
hectares which is about 27% of total areas. Excessive acidity obstructs the availability of most
of the soil nutrients on the one hand and on the other it makes metal ions more available on
the soil as well as increases availability of harmful heavy metal. Entering into crops these heavy
metals will reduce the quality of the crops and will appear as a threat to public health ( SRDI).
So, fertility of soil is gradually decreasing due to the depletion of organic matters, nutrient,
and acidity in the soil. Extension workers have to be active in conservation and management
of fertility as well as to recover the decaying fertility of soil.
Another reason of losing fertility of soil is an unbalanced use of chemical fertilizers. In every
district, there is a soil testing lab of SRDI. The real condition of soil can be known by testing in
lab and measures can be taken for preservation of soil fertility and increasing total
productivity of land by using the recommended balanced dose of fertilizers. Fertilizer
Recommendation Guide published by BARC, online recommendation of using fertilizer from
“Service Box" of DAE website can be helpful in using fertilizer at a balanced dose.
It is noticed that some farmers sell top-soil of the land for financial gain or due to the pressure
of corrupt gangs associated with brick kiln which reduces soil fertility notably along with crop
18.2.5 Preservation and Management of Agricultural Soil Fertility
Challenges in Agricultural Extension

productivity. DAE has to play an active role through administrative management and
motivational programmes to prevent this.
Though the land area of Bangladesh is not large, its landscape, climate and usefulness of land
in crop production, quality of soil, availability of irrigation water etc. differ from area to area.
Moreover the sea coast of southern regions, the Barind of North-West, Haors of North-East
and hills of South-East are different in characteristics from other regions. For these
differences, all areas are not suitable for cultivating all types of crops. For this reason,
extension of the 'Crop-Zoning' based crop production system is needed. The booklet 'Land
Suitability Assessment and Crop Zoning in Bangladesh ' published by Bangladesh Agricultural
Research Council (BARC) can be used as a helpful guideline. DAE will take special initiatives to
introduce the 'Crop Zoning' based crop production system.
For crop production, the unbalanced use of fertilizer, pesticide, fungicide etc. has become a
common practice. These chemicals are very often adulterated. In many cases, farmers are not
aware of quality, application levels and rules and regulations, duration of residual effect etc. of
these chemicals. Farmers apply these chemicals at high dosages without proper knowledge.
Use of these chemicals without following rules and regulations is a threat to public health and
the environment. Food safety should begin at the farm. In this regard, DAE has to take
effective measures to ensure safe food crop production.
In crop production, all activities from sowing seeds to storage or preservation have to be of
good standard. Seed borne diseases are big threats to public health. Food grains can be
polluted by the germs of bacteria, fungus, virus in times of crop production, processing,
packaging and marketing. Although the risk of food intake in the process of cooking is
somewhat lower, the risk is very serious in all cases where food is consumed directly. This is a
big problem in case of exporting produced food grains and cash crops. It will be considered as
a big issue in future activities of DAE.
18.2.6 Introducing 'Crop-Zoning' Based Crop Production System
18.2.7 Production of Safe Food Crops
18.2.8 Taking Good Agricultural Practice (GAP)

18.2.9 Emphasising the Use of Surface Water Source for Irrigation by Reducing
Dependency on Ground Water and Efficient Irrigation Management
From statistics it is seen that the number of irrigation equipment used for irrigation in the year
of 2014 - 2015 is - 36500 deep tube-wells, 1549700 shallow tube-wells, 167200 power pumps
(BBS). That is to say, the number of power pumps used for irrigation from surface water
sources is only 10.54% of total number of irrigation equipment. The combined number of
deep tube-wells and shallow tube-wells used for lifting underground irrigation water is 10.75
per square kilometre on average.
From statistics it is also seen that only in Boro season, the source of 80% of irrigation water is
from underground and in extreme dry season (peak time) that is, in the month of March -
April, 63% of total irrigation water comes from underground (BADC). The amount of ground
water used all the year for household and other works is not negligible. Lifting large amount of
water from underground every year may cause extreme threats to protect natural balance in
near future.
Every year only 94%, that is, 50 billion cubic metre of 53 billion cubic metre lifted water from
underground is recharged (BADC). As a result, the groundwater level is gradually decreasing
every year. Groundwater level in extreme dry season (March - April) is very low. As of 2004,
shallow tube-wells within 6300 square kilometre radius are unable for irrigation. In 2010, this
increased by 45% to 9700 square kilometres. This has also caused the level of salinity in
southern region to increase. Experts have warned that quick decreasing of groundwater level
can endanger the security of food and water resources of Bangladesh. In order to get rid of this
situation and surface water irrigation resources should be adopted and dependency on
groundwater should be reduced.
Pressure on groundwater can be reduced by changing the cropping pattern and making
efficient use of irrigation water. Water consumption can be reduced from 5000 litres/kg of rice
to 2000 litres/kg. Use of irrigation water has to be reduced by efficient irrigation
management. DAE will play an active role to preserve groundwater as well as use efficient
irrigation management and ensure the security of food and water resources.
Challenges in Agricultural Extension

18.2.10 Crop Production in Char Regions and Increasing of Productivity
18.2.11 Converting Women's Power into Agricultural Extension Resources
18.2.12 Commercialisation of Agriculture
There are over 230 large and medium sized rivers in the country, most of which are distressed
(Ministry of Water Resources, December 2003) and vast areas of the two sides are chars.
These char regions are suitable for agriculture and because of silty soil layers, fertility of the
land is at an acceptable rate. Agricultural works in these areas are taking place. However there
is indifference and negligence of agriculture in char areas. Application of technologies and
innovation of new technologies suitable for char area can play an important role in agricultural
development and multiplying the production and productivity of crops of char regions.
Keeping this goal in front, DAE can provide specialised extension services in char regions.
Women have been in agricultural activities since the beginning of creation. Multi-dimensional
activities continued for a long time for including women at a very large scale with agriculture
and enriching them with the knowledge of modern technologies, still women's participation
in agriculture is not satisfactory in that sense. Wherever women's participation is confirmed,
it proves that women can play very pivotal roles in agricultural sectors by expanding their
power. And this is very helpful in agricultural development. DAE will take effective measures
to convert women's power into agricultural extension resources.
At present, the world is striving for "commercialization of agriculture ". The main goal of
commercial agriculture is growing market oriented extra production and converting
agriculture into profitable business. According to FAO, commercial farmers are those who are
able to sell 50% of their production.
Recently most of the farmers have taken up the market oriented production system.
Competition among the farmers regarding production is increasing. The farmers who cannot
survive in the competition, are leaving agricultural activities. For this reason, the number of
large and middle farmers in Bangladesh are gradually decreasing . Use of modern and
improved technologies are mostly needed to make agriculture profitable and commercial.
Failure of making agriculture profitable and commercial by using modern and improved
technologies can gradually increase the number of disinterested farmers in agriculture. This
can cause negative impact on the economy of this agricultural country.

In agricultural extension, the field of commercialisation is very large. Recently among
different activities of extension, market linkage, value addition, value chain, supply chain etc.
play important roles. DAE will strengthen the base of agricultural development by developing
appropriate strategies in agricultural commercialisation.
New applications, use and popularisation of e-extension services are the demands of
changing times. Various techniques are used to provide e-extension services throughout the
country and abroad. In Bangladesh, its use is still limited. DAE is gradually going forward in
providing e-extension services. By the application and popularisation of e-extension services,
DAE could build a good relationship with the farmers of the country, especially with farmers of
backward areas. Thus the farmers will be helped in any agriculture related matters and their
efficiency will be increased. At present, all the extension workers of DAE encourage farmers to
apply and use all facilities of e-extension services . And in future, they will also take initiatives
in popularising e-extension services.
There is scope to strengthen monitoring and supervision of the activities implemented by
DAE. Extension workers and their supervisors are aware of the weaknesses of DAE in
monitoring and supervising their activities. To improve this, senior officials can use their
hierarchal power. This will improve monitoring and supervision. In future, activities of
monitoring and supervision will be taken as challenges in every level of DAE.
It is noticeable that most of the fruits cultivated in homestead are not improved varieties.
Fruits are a source of nutrition and financial gain. DAE will play an active roles in replacing
improved varieties of fruits in homestead and in increasing productivity of fruits by proper
management to supply money and nutrition. Thus, there will be scope for more money and
nutrition supply and particular example of DAE's qualified and stable activities will be
established.
DAE will take initiatives in replacing improved varieties of fruit in homestead and rejuvenation
of old mango trees.
18.2.13 e-Extension Services
18.2.14 Strengthening Monitoring and Supervision in Extension Activities
18.2.15 Replacing Improved Varieties of Fruit in Homestead
Challenges in Agricultural Extension

18.2.16 Urban Agricultural Development
18.2.17 In Addition to the Challenges Mentioned above, DAE has to go
Forward with other Challenges that are as Follows:
In Bangladesh, there are many large and small cities and towns. These cities or towns are
gradually expanding. Many permanent buildings and infrastructures are developed. DAE will
play a vital role in involving women for utilizing fallen town or city areas or rooftops and will
strengthen modern agricultural activities.
i.
Encourage increased productivity and diversification of crops in hostile environment
ii.
Take actions in rapid extension of new invented technologies
iii. Resist depletion of natural resources
iv. Provide assurance of nutrition security and production of quality and safe food crops
v.
Strengthen PPP (Public Private Partnership) in case of technology transfer, distribution
of quality inputs, agricultural market linkage etc.
vi. Integrate sustainable agricultural production systems with changed climate
vii. Popularisation of stress tolerant crop varieties to save productivity in hostile
environment
viii. Take actions in decreasing the post-havest losses of crops and emphasize on agroprocessing
ix. Undertake an efficient agricultural market management
x.
Strengthen the links of extension between research, education, government or semigovernment or non-government or private organisations, farmers and market
xi. Support agricultural mechanization
xii. Promote efficient use of agricultural inputs such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides
xiii. Informing the farmers about crops cultivation coherent to weather and advance
forecast of aggressive or adverse weather
xiv. Extension of need based and location specific technologies
xv. Popularization of crop production using floating technologies in the southern and
haor region
xvi. Create awareness of rain water harvesting or saving in the Southern region and crop
production by avoiding salinity through mulching
xvii.Emphasize on preserving soil moisture by mulching or green-covered (Mimosa)
systems to produce crops in drought-prone and mountainous areas etc.

APPENDIX

Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
Focus on one commudity, most effective if. Research, Extension,
Marketing and Loans all delt with by one dynamic body
Increase production of specific commodity. Less complex and
more straitforward. Also ensure quality is appropriate.
Controlled by commodity organisation
Instructions easily available ( sometimes printed)
Hightly trained personnel and equipment to genrate sharply
focused extension messages
Increased production of crop at desired quality
Messages tend to fit problems. Organization small and
dynamic and easier to monitor. Relativevly cost effective.
Lack of attention to total farming system or other crops.
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
COMPARISION OF VARIOUS EXTENSION APPROACH
Axinn mentioned in 1988 diffrernt types of 'Extension Approaches those are adoptetd by various
Organizations and Instit3utions aroud the world. DAE’s ‘Revised Extension Approach’ is a
combination of a number of these approaches. A brief outline of each approach is provided below:
1. General Agricultural Extension Approach
APPENDIX 1
2. The Commodity Specialized Approach
1 Based on the work of Axinn, G (1988), Guide on Alternative Extension Approaches, FAO, Rome.
A 3
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
Technology Transfer ( classical approach)
Increase production
Controlled by Government(Top-down)
Large number field staff throughout country
High amount necessary in terms of salaries
Increase in national production
Can ineterpret national goverment policy. Covers whole
country. Conitinuty. Rapid communication
Lack of two-way flow of information. Expensive and inefficient.
Smaller numbers of more competent staff more cost effective
than larger numbers of incompetent staff.
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

A 4
3. The Training And Visit System
4. The Agricultural Extension Participatory Approach
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
Field personnel are not properly trained, out of date, don’t visit
farmers and are not adequetly supervised. Discipline and
structure are needed.
Induce farmers to incease production of specific crops
Disciplined, patterned, fixed scedules with training. In-service
training for staff. Two-step flow of communication. Centralised
Face to face contact. Trainng from Subject Matter Speialist to
Village Extension Workers.
Very high cost -usually from International loans. High transport
cost.
Increase in yield and agricultual production
Officers meet farmers. Discipline . Spirit of service
High longterm cost. Lack of two way flow of information. Social
structure often prevents this lack of flexibility. Messages often
don’t fit.Shortage of subject matter specialists.
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
Farmers have much knowledge but could improve much by
access to more information. Active particiationof farmers is a
prerequisite to success. Use vetern farmers
Increase production, increase consumption and enhence
quality of life of rural people.
Controlled locally by farmers groups, farmers club etc.
Relevance to local needs.
Many meetings, farmer to farmer visits.
Extension workers who are catalysts or facilitators. Less cost
than that of other approaches.
Continuty of lacal extenion organisation and benefits to the
community.
Messages and activities likely to fit needs. less cost. Caters to
human as well as technical side of extension promise.
Lack of Government control. Raised expectations from farmers.
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
APPENDIX 1

5. The Project Approach
A 5
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
6. The Farming System Development Approach
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Resources Required
Technology which fits the needs of small faremes is not
available and needs to be generated locally
To provide extension personnel with research results tailored
to meet needs and interest of the farmers in local conditions.
Controlled jointly by Farmers, Extension and Researchers so it
fits needs of geographical location (holistic). Simmillar to
perticipatory approach.
Interdisciplinary system appproach.Researcher must listen to
farmers and understand their system.
Time and Staff
:
:
:
:
:
Large Govenment beaurocratics are ineffective. Beter to focus
resources and activities at specfic locations. Successful results
may be replicated.
To demonstrate technique, to setout a variety of approaches to
input to a large project e.g. to provide extension information
Usually controlled by ‘Donor’ Agency and Central Government.
Often an uneasy allience between local Govenment and Donor
agency
Allowances to field staff, tarnspot, facilities, equipment,
housing, foreign advisors. Staff usually assigned to project.
Disruption of staffing and vehicles.
Change at project site. Change in Target group behaviour.
Increase in desired crop production
Focus, quick results, ease of evaluation, testing and
experimentation. Lasting of lessons to agricultural extension
systems.
Too short in time, too much money. Usually unsustainable.
Diruption to personnel. Double standard for staff. High cost per
unit of achievement. Always reliance of external funding and
short project life time. A way of 1st world personnel
researching and getting exposure in 3rd world.

7. Cost Sharing Approach
A 6
Measure of Success

Advantages
Disadvantages
Extent to which farmers adopt tecnology developed by
programme.
Relevance and fit of messages generated. Linkages between
extension, reaearch and farmers. This approach depends on
these linkage
High cost of forming interdisciplinary team. Slow results. Difficult
to monitor effectiveness
:
:
:
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
Better fit if beficiaries are cotributing something. A sumsidy
from outside because farm ‘people are too poor’. Local
community may be asked to pay for housing and goods for
extnsion officers. Agricultural extension agents must serve
intersest of community. Learning and sharing from farmer to
farmer
Help farm people improve their lives and increase
productivity. Make agricultural extension affordable and
sustainable. Promising in terms of financing agricultural
extension services.
Local farm peaople have strong voice and can refuse to pay
their dues, therefore, quite democratic.
Willingness of farm community to provide their share of costs.
They must be satisfied that the extension is useful to them.
Relevance, better adoption, influence on selection of
extension personnel. Lower cost to Central Govenment.
Central Government can’t easily control programme or
monitor and report on them.
:
:
:
:
:
:
APPENDIX 1

8. The Educational Institution Approach
(Indirectly involved by training students who later join extension services)
A 7
Assumption
Purpose
Programme Planning
Implementation
Measure of Success
Advantages
Disadvantages
School and colleges have technical knowledge relevant to
farm people. Technical staff need interaction with real
farmers.
Help rural people learn science. Help teachers learn adopt
actual farm practices.
Those who control educational institutions curriculum
Usually information flows down from education institution to
school extensionist to faremers. Sometimes support through
massmedia and producing extension information packs.
Audience size and rate of adoption.
Cost effective. Skilled personnel can sevice both education
institutions and extension service. Curriculum kept more
down to earth. It builds the practical into the classroom and
the scientific into the field extension programme
Lecturers can betoo academic. Sometime copetition between
extesion personnel and lecturers or between Ministry
Agriculture and Ministry of Education.
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

A 9
APPENDIX 2

A 11

A 13

A 15

A 16
APPENDIX 2

A 17

A 18
APPENDIX 2

A 19

A 20
APPENDIX 2

A 21

A 22
APPENDIX 2

A 23

A 24
APPENDIX 2

A 25

APPENDIX 3
SOME PARTICIPATORY RURAL APPRAISAL (PRA) TECHNIQUES
Technique: Physical Maps
Procedure:
Technique: Social Maps
Procedure:
Use: To know the various physical conditions of a village or area through observing and drawing
a physical map. Thus, to establish relationships between natural resources and farmers’
activities. To identify problems and opportunities for proper planning extension activities
Select an area- Farmer’s group or Village
Ask farmers to prepare an outline of what the area look like
Ask them to mark roads, fields, river, important building etc. in the map
Ask them to identify what is grown where, and why
Ask how thinks have changed? What might the map look like in thepast five years?
Why? What do the farmer want the map to look like in next five years? What help from
extension do they need to develop and change the area.
Use: To know the population size, number of house hold, social pattern, family relation type
and community facilities (water sources, health centers etc. of a village or area using social
maps in order to identify issues to be tackled through extension service by DAE.
Select an area- Village/ Word/ Farmer’s Group
Ask local farmers to identify who live in this areaand to include the followings:
- How many households?
- How do they classify households? As male or female headed? By family profession,
farm size or income?
Ask farmers to prepare an outline map of selected the area with road, river and fields
Ask them to identify where each household lives.Is there a pattern? Do smaller farmers
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
A 26
APPENDIX 3

live near the river? Do larger famers live by the market? Do female headed households
live near the land with low or high productivity? Why? What is the implication for local
extension programmes?
Use: Provide firsthand information about an area. Establishes relationships between different
resources and to identify problems and opportunities for extension to build on and address.
Provide informal scope to know the villagers.
Select an area- Village/ Word/ Farmer’s Group
With a small group of farmers, choose a route to walk through the area.
Make list of things to look for - trees, crops, livestock, land quality, problems,
opportunities
Walk the route together
Observe changes in land use, problems and opportunities during the walk, and ask
questions
Make a diagram at the end of walk
Use: To identify target groups and their different needs, and how they can be
supported by extension programmes. It provides an idea about the financial
conditions of the villagers.
Select an area- Village/ Para/ Farmer’s Group
Ask farmers to make a listof all the households. Write individual householdin separate
piece of paper/card
Ask farmers How do they categories households?
- By occupation- farming, business, government/nongovernment job?
Technique: Transect Walk
Procedure:
Technique: Wealth Ranking
Procedure
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
A 27

- By farm size- large, small, landless?
- By income -high medium, low?
Try linking this technique to technique -Social Maps
Ask farmer to select one categorization that they prefer
Ask the farmer to short the cards of households into their categories and note how
many fall into each category
Ask why distribution is as it is
Ask what different extension support each category needs
Ask what different problems each category has
Ask whether there are specific opportunities that extension should recognise.
Use: To identify farmers’ information needs for designing responsive extension activities.
Work with a group of 20-to 30 farmers operating similar farming system
Define topic to discuss, such as soil management, seed preservation
Divide the group into smaller groups of 5-6 people each, provide them with paper and
pen, and ask them to brain storm a list of problems faced with respect to the topic
When list is made, each group should present them to a plenary
A master list of problems is made, and five most important problems that DAE can
directly assist with are selected
Ask the group whether they have triedto solve these problems. What experiences they
have in doing so?
Record the discussion in the SAAO diary
Explain that DAE will plan one activity for this group to address one of these problems.
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
Technique: Problem Census
Procedure
A 28
APPENDIX 3

APPENDIX 4(A)
DTERMINATION OF OBJECTIVES FOR ANNUAL EXTENSION PROGRAMME PLANNING FORM
Financial Year: ..............
Upazila: ......................... District: .................. Date: ............................
Similar Core Problems
Frequency of Problems
Determination of Objectives
Objective 1:
Objective 2:
Objective 3:
Group Similar Core Problems to Generate Objectives
Target Group of Farmers
## Determine objectives for all target group in the same way.
A 29

APPENDIX 4 (B)
ANNUAL EXTENSION PROGRAME PLANNING FORM
Season: Kharif 2/Rabi/Kharif 1, Financial Year: ......................
Upazila: .......................... District: ............................ Date: ........................................
Objective-2
Serial No.
Description of Activities
*** Project Activities
*** Follow-up Activities
Target Group
of Farmers
No. of Event
Remarks
Schedule
Source of Funds
(Related Project/
Program)
No-cost/Follow-up/
Motivation
Objective-1:
Serial No.
Description of Activities
*** Project Activities
*** Follow-up Activities
Target Group
of Farmers
No. of Event
Remarks
Schedule
Source of Funds
(Related Project/
Program)
No-cost/Follow-up/
Motivation
## Use same form to plan for achieving every objective of each season
A 30
APPENDIX 4

`ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 msμvšÍ
bxwZgvjv, 2016-17
gwš¿cwil` wefvM
MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKvi
A 31
Appendix 5(A)
* This policy document is not available in English

m~wPcÎ
weqq
c„ôv
†cÖÿvcU
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i KvVv‡gv
2.1
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
2.2
DcμgwYKv
2.3
†mKkb 1: iƒcKí, Awfjÿ ̈, †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n Ges Kvh©vewj
2.4
†mKkb 2: Kvh©μgmg~‡ni P‚ovšÍ djvdj/cÖfve (Outcome/Impact)
2.5
†mKkb 3: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, AMÖvwaKvi, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n
2.6
ms‡hvRbx 1: kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
2.7
ms‡hvRbx 2: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZ
2.8
ms‡hvRbx 3: Ab ̈vb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi wbKU mywbw`©ó Kg©m¤úv`b Pvwn`v
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb c×wZ
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 m¤úv`b cÖwμqv 2016-17
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i mgqm~wP 2016-17
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 `vwLj cÖwμqv
cwiwkó K: evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i KvVv‡gv
cwiwkó L: 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n
A 32
APPENDIX 5

`ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 msμvšÍ
bxwZgvjv, 2016-17
1. †cÖÿvcU
2. `ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i KvVv‡gv
iƒcKí 2021-Gi h_vh_ ev ̄Íevq‡bi Rb ̈ GKwU Kvh©Ki, `ÿ Ges MwZkxj cÖkvmwbK e ̈e ̄’v GKvšÍ
Acwinvh© e‡j miKvi g‡b K‡i| G cwi‡cÖwÿ‡Z ̄^”QZv I `vqe×Zv e„w×, m¤ú‡`i h_vh_ e ̈envi
wbwðZKiY Ges cÖvwZôvwbK mÿgZv Dbœq‡bi Rb ̈ 2014-15 A_©-eQ‡i 48wU gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi m‡1⁄2
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿ‡ii gva ̈‡g Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv c×wZ Pvjy n‡q‡Q| 2015-16 A_©-eQ‡i
48wU gš¿Yvjq/wefvM Ges AvIZvaxb `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡ni m‡1⁄2 evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿwiZ n‡q‡Q|
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡i 48wU evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 m¤úv`‡bi wm×všÍ MÖnY Kiv n‡q‡Q| mswkøó mKj
`ßi/ms ̄’v Zv‡`i AvIZvaxb gvVch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n‡K evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb G ev ̄Íevq‡b
cÖ‡qvRbxq mnvqZv cÖ`vb Ki‡e|
D‡jøL ̈, gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYq‡b mnvqZv Kivi Rb ̈ c„_K GKwU
bxwZgvjv cÖYqb Kiv n‡q‡Q| GB bxwZgvjv †Kej `ßi/ms ̄’vi Pzw3 cÖYqb, ev ̄Íevqb cwiexÿY I
g~j ̈vq‡bi †ÿ‡Î AbymiY Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ, DcμgwYKv Ges
wbgœewY©Z †mKkb I ms‡hvRbxmg~n AšÍfz©3 _vK‡e:
†mKkb 1: iƒcKí, Awfjÿ ̈, †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n Ges Kvh©vewj
†mKkb 2: wewfbœ Kvh©μg P‚ovšÍ djvdj/cÖfve (Outcome/Impact)
†mKkb 3: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, AMÖvwaKvi, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎv
ms‡hvRbx 1: kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
ms‡hvRbx 2: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZ
ms‡hvRbx 3: Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©‡bi †ÿ‡Î Ab ̈vb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi wbKU mywbw`©ó Pvwn`v
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i GKwU KvVv‡gv cwiwkó-K G ms‡hvwRZ nj| D3 KvVv‡gv AbymiY K‡i cÖ‡Z ̈K
`ßi/ms ̄’v evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`‡b Pzw3 cÖ ̄‘Z Ki‡e|
A 33

2.1 `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
2.2 DcμgwYKv
2.3 †mKkb-1: iƒcKí (Vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (Mission), †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic Objectives) Ges Kvh©vewj (Functions)
ms‡ÿ‡c `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi GKwU wPÎ Zz‡j aivi j‡ÿ ̈ evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z GB AskwU
ms‡hvRb Kiv n‡q‡Q| G‡Z mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi MZ 3 eQ‡ii cÖavb AR©bmg~n, Kg©m¤úv`‡bi †ÿ‡Î †h
mKj mgm ̈v ev P ̈v‡jÄ i‡q‡Q †m ̧wj Ges fwel ̈‡Z `ßi/ms ̄’v Kx Kx cÖavb cÖavb jÿ ̈ AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq
Zvi cwiKíbv m¤ú‡K© ms‡ÿ‡c Av‡jvKcvZ Ki‡e| ZvQvov, 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii m¤¢ve ̈ cÖavb
AR©bmg~n G As‡k ms‡ÿ‡c eY©bv Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i ïiæ‡Z GKwU DcμgwYKv _vK‡e, hv‡Z GB Pzw3 m¤úv`‡bi D‡Ïk ̈, Pzw3i
cÿmg~n Ges Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z djvdjmg~n AR©‡bi wel‡q Zv‡`i m¤§Z nIqv m¤ú‡K© D‡jøL _vK‡e|
iƒcKí g~jZ GKwU `ßi/ms ̄’vi fwel ̈Z Av`k© Ae ̄’v (idealized state) wb‡`©k K‡i| GKwU
`ßi/ms ̄’v‡K Zvi †bZ...‡Z¡ fwel ̈‡Z †Kvb& Ae ̄’vq †`L‡Z Pvq iƒcK‡í Zvi GKwU e„nËi wPÎ cvIqv hvq|
iƒcKí mvaviYZ 5-10 eQi †gqv‡`i Rb ̈ wba©viY Kiv nq| d‡j †Kvb `ßi/ms ̄’vi KvVv‡gvMZ cwieZ©b
bv n‡j ev Kv‡Ri ai‡b e ̈vcK cwieZ©b bv n‡j iƒcKí eQi eQi cwieZ©b n‡e bv|
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Awfjÿ ̈ ms‡ÿ‡c Dc ̄’vcb Kiv evÃbxq| my ̄úófv‡e Awfjÿ ̈ e ̈3 Kivi j‡ÿ ̈
`ßi/ms ̄’v‡K wbgœewY©Z welqmg~n we‡ePbvq ivL‡Z n‡e:
`ßi/ms ̄’vi †gŠj D‡Ïk ̈ Kx A_©vr `ßi/ms ̄’v Kx AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq;
Kxfv‡e AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq; Ges
Kvi Rb ̈ AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq, A_©vr Gi m¤¢ve ̈ DcKvi‡fvMx Kviv|
Awfjÿ ̈ Aek ̈B iƒcK‡íi m‡1⁄2 mvgÄm ̈c~Y© n‡Z n‡e| iƒcKí g~jZ e„nËi Kíbv Ges Awfjÿ ̈ iƒcKí
AR©‡bi Rb ̈ M...nxZ Kvh©μgmg~n wb‡`©k K‡i|
iƒcKí (Vision)
Awfjÿ ̈ (Mission)
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A 34
APPENDIX 5

†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ (Strategic Objectives)
Kvh©vewj (Functions)
Kjvg 1: `ßi/ms ̄’vi †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni ZvwjKv
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ ej‡Z wbw`©ó mg‡q - ̄^í ga ̈ I `xN©‡gqv`x `ßi/ms ̄’vi wbw`©ó bxwZgvjv Ges Kg©m~wP
ev ̄Íevq‡bi gva ̈‡g Zvi Awa‡ÿ‡Î †h mKj Dbœqb jÿ ̈ AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq †m ̧wj‡K eySv‡e|
miKvi iƒcKí 2021, 7g cÂevwl©K cwiKíbv, Ab ̈vb ̈ †KŠkjMZ `wjj, mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi bxwZ
msμvšÍ `wjjmg~n Ges ev‡RU KvVv‡gvi Av‡jv‡K we` ̈gvb †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n ch©v‡jvPbvc~e©K
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e| `ßi/ms ̄’vi c‡ÿ AR©b Kiv Kómva ̈ †Kej Giƒc we‡ePbvq
ev mn‡R AR©‡hvM ̈ we‡ePbvq †Kvb †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ we‡qvRb ev ms‡hvRb Kiv mgxwPb n‡e bv|
`ßi/ms ̄’vi iƒcKí, Awfjÿ ̈ Ges Kvh©vejxmg~n Ges †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni g‡a ̈ GKwU ms‡hvM
_vK‡Z n‡e| ZvQvov `ßi/ms ̄’vi iƒcKí Ges Awfjÿ ̈ mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi iƒcKí I Awfjÿ ̈-
Gi m‡1⁄2I mvgÄm ̈c~Y© n‡Z n‡e, hv‡Z `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kvw•ÿZ jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©‡bi gva ̈‡g gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi
Kvw•ÿZ jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©b m¤¢e nq|
`ßi/ms ̄v’ i caÖ vb Kvhv© ejx GB †mKk‡b wjwce× Ki‡Z n‡e| `ßi/ms ̄v’ i Kvhμ© g wjwce×Ki‡Yi †ÿ‡Î
mswkóø `ßi/ms ̄v’ KZK© c`Ö Ë †mev Ges D3 `ßi/ms ̄v’ i Kge© ›U‡b Dwjwø LZ welqmgn~ we‡ePbvq wb‡Z n‡e|
GKwU mwy bw`ó© jÿ ̈ AR‡© bi Rb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄v’ i cwÖ ZwU †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ wbav© iY Kiv nq| †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈
AR‡© bi Rb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄v’ †h mKj Kvhμ© g ev ̄eÍ vqb K‡i _v‡K †m ̧wji djvdj (output) GK ev GKvwaK
Po‚ všÍ djvdj (Outcome) AR‡© b mnvqZv K‡i| †mKkb-2 G `ßi/ms ̄v’ wewfbœ Kvhμ© g ev ̄eÍ vq‡bi
gva ̈‡g †h mKj Po‚ všÍ djvdj (end result or outcome) ARb© Ki‡Z Pvq †m ̧wj D‡jLø Ki‡e| ZvQvov,
†mKkb-2 G cwÖ ZwU Po‚ všÍ djvd‡ji wecix‡Z GK ev GKvwaK Kgm© ¤úv`b mP~ Kmn cvÖ mw1⁄2K Ab ̈vb ̈ Z_ ̈vw`
c`Ö vb Ki‡Z n‡e| iƒcKí Ges Awfj‡ÿ ̈i b ̈vq Po‚ všÍ djvdjI eQi eQi cwieZb© Kiv mgxwPb n‡e bv|
†mKkb 3-Gi Kjvg 1-G ewY©Z †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n Ges †mKkb 1-G ewY©Z †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n
GKB n‡Z n‡e| D‡jøL ̈ †h, `ßi/ms ̄’vi †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ QvovI KwZcq Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈
†mKkb 3-G AšÍfz©3 _vK‡e| mswkøó A_©-eQi mgvß nIqvi ci `ßi/ms ̄’vi cÖK...Z Kg©m¤úv`b me©‡gvU
100 gvb (weight)-Gi wfwË‡Z cwigvc Kiv n‡e| GB 100 gv‡bi g‡a ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi †KŠkjMZ
2.4 †mKkb-2: Kvh©μg mg~‡ni P‚ovšÍ djvdj/cÖfve (Outcome/Impact)
2.5 †mKkb 3: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, AMÖvwaKvi, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎv
A 35

D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni Rb ̈ 80 b¤^i Ges Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z 20 b¤^i wba©vwiZ _vK‡e|
Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n miKvwi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ RvZxq KwgwU KZ©...K Aby‡gvw`Z
Ges mKj `ßi/ms ̄’vi Rb ̈ mgfv‡e cÖ‡hvR ̈ n‡e| cwiwkó L-G Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i ZvwjKv
ms‡hvRb Kiv nj|
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n ̧iæZ¡ I Zvrc‡h©i μgvbymv‡i D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e| †m‡ÿ‡Î, AwaKZi ̧iæZ¡m¤úbœ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i gvb †ewk n‡e Ges Kg ̧iæZ¡c~Y© D‡Ï‡k ̈i gvb Kg n‡e| †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni g‡a ̈ gvb
eÈ‡bi †ÿ‡Î fvimvg ̈ iÿv Ki‡Z n‡e|
cÖwZwU †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ c~i‡Yi j‡ÿ ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’v KZ©...K D3 D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z cÖ‡qvRbxq Kvh©μg
wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e| KL‡bv KL‡bv GKwU †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z GK ev GKvwaK Kvh©μgI
_vK‡Z cv‡i| D‡jøL ̈ †h, evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z mKj Kvh©μg ev‡RU eiv‡Ïi Av‡jv‡K MÖnY
Ki‡Z n‡e| Dbœqb A_ev Abybœqb ev‡R‡U mywbw`©ó eivÏ †bB ev eivÏ cvIqvi m¤¢vebv †bB Ggb †Kvb
Kvh©μg G‡Z AšÍfz©3 Kiv hv‡e bv|
Kjvg 3-G ewY©Z cÖwZwU Kvh©μ‡gi Rb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’v‡K GK ev GKvwaK Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK wba©viY Ki‡Z
n‡e, hv Øviv eQi †k‡l D3 Kvh©μg ev ̄Íevq‡bi AMÖMwZ cwigvc Kiv hv‡e| Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n
wba©vi‡Yi †ÿ‡Î †h †Kvb iKg ˆØZZv cwinvi Kiv mgxwPb n‡e|
†Kvb †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z GKvwaK Kvh©μg _vK‡j cÖwZwU Kvh©μ‡gi ev ̄Íevqb- AMÖMwZ
g~j ̈vq‡bi Rb ̈ GK ev GKvwaK Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK _vK‡e Ges cÖwZwU Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki GKwU wba©vwiZ
gvb _vK‡e| wewfbœ Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki gvb Ggbfv‡e wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e hv‡Z me ̧wj m~P‡Ki †gvU gvb
mswkøó †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z eivÏK...Z gv‡bi mgvb nq|
Kjvg 2: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni Av‡cwÿK gvb eivÏKiY
Kjvg 3: `ßi/ms ̄’vi †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n AR©‡bi j‡ÿ ̈ Kvh©μg mywbw`©óKiY
Kjvg-4: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges Zvi GKKmg~n mywbw`©óKiY
Kjvg-5: Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎv cwigv‡ci GKK GB Kjv‡g D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kjvg-6: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~‡ni wecix‡Z AvcwÿK gvb eivÏKiY
Kjvg-7 I 8: GB KjvgØ‡q h_vμ‡g 2014-15 Ges 2015-16 A_©-eQ‡i cÖK...Z AR©b D‡jøL
Ki‡Z n‡e|
A 36
APPENDIX 5

Kjvg-9-13: Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎv mywbw`©óKiY
jÿ ̈gvÎv n‡”Q Kg©m¤úv`b Dbœq‡bi PvwjKvkw3| myZivs jÿ ̈gvÎv GKBm‡1⁄2 AR©b‡hvM ̈ Ges
D”PvKv•ÿx nIqv DwPZ| jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n‡K wbgœiƒc 5 `dv † ̄‹‡j web ̈ ̄Í Ki‡Z n‡e:
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
D‡jøL ̈, †Kvb Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z cÖK...Z AR©b 60%-Gi wb‡P n‡j cÖvß gvb aiv n‡e
0 (k~b ̈)|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z iƒcKí 2021, 7g cÂevwl©K cwiKíbv, SDG Ges ga ̈‡gqvw` ev‡RU
KvVv‡gvi m‡1⁄2 mvgÄm ̈c~Y© n‡Z n‡e| †m‡ÿ‡Î, `ßi/ms ̄’vi cÖavb cÖavb Kvh©μg, Kg©m~wP Ges mKj
Dbœqb cÖK‡íi jÿ ̈gvÎv evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z cÖwZdwjZ nIqv evÃbxq| jÿ ̈gvÎv wba©vi‡Yi †ÿ‡Î
c~e©eZ©x `yB eQ‡ii cÖK...Z AR©b I AR©‡bi cÖe„w×, `ßi/ms ̄’vi mÿgZv Ges weivRgvb ev ̄ÍeZv we‡ePbv
Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kjvg 14-15: 2015-16 A_© eQ‡ii cÖK...Z AR©b Ges 2016-17 A_© eQ‡ii jÿ ̈gvÎvi wfwË‡Z
2017-18 Ges 2018-19 A_©-eQ‡ii cÖ‡ÿwcZ jÿ ̈gvÎv Kjvg 13 I 14-G cÖ`k©b Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z e ̈eüZ wewfbœ kãms‡ÿ‡ci c~Y©iƒc ms‡hvRbx 1-G mwbœ‡ewkZ Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z ms‡hvRbx 2-G †mKkb 3-Gi Kjvg 4-G DwjøwLZ wewfbœ Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK,
cÖwZwU m~P‡Ki weeiY Ges cwigvc c×wZ D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e|
KwZcq †ÿ‡Î †Kvb †Kvb `ßi/ms ̄’vi mdjZv Ab ̈ GK ev GKvwaK `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi Ici
wbf©i K‡i| Ab ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi wbKU cÖZ ̈vwkZ mnvqZv Ges KwZcq wba©vwiZ Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki
mdjZvi †ÿ‡Î Ab ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi Ici wbf©ikxj welqwU ms‡hvRbx 3-G D‡jøL _vK‡e| Z‡e, †h‡ÿ‡Î
wbf©ikxjZvi gvÎv kZKiv 20 fv‡Mi AwaK †Kej †m mKj `ßi/ms ̄’vi bvg D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e| GB
AmvaviY
AwZ DËg
DËg
PjwZ gvb
PjwZ gv‡bi wb‡gœ
2.6 kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
2.7 Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZ
2.8 Ab ̈vb ̈ gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi wbKU mywbw`©ó Kg©m¤úv`b Pvwn`v
A 37

wbf©ikxjZvi gvÎv mywbw`©ó I cwigvc‡hvM ̈ n‡Z n‡e| †h‡nZz GB wbf©ikxjZv mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi m‡1⁄2I
m¤ú„3 n‡e, †m‡nZz wbf©ikxjZvi gvÎv wbe©vP‡bi †ÿ‡Î mZK©Zv Aej¤^b Kiv mgxwPb n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z avh©K...Z jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡ni cÖK...Z AR©‡bi wfwË‡Z †gvU
† ̄‹vi (composite score) wba©viY Kiv n‡e| evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z avh©K...Z jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z
cÖK...Z AR©b g~j ̈vq‡bi Rb ̈ h_vmg‡q GKwU c„_K wb‡`©wkKv Rvwi Kiv n‡e|
mKj `ßi/ms ̄’v iƒcKí 2011, 7g cÂevwl©K cwiKíbv, SDG, `ßi/ms ̄’v KZ©...K M„nxZ
bxwZgvjv/`wjj, miKv‡ii Ab ̈vb ̈ †KŠkjcÎ, wbe©vPbx Bk‡Znvi Ges mg‡q mg‡q miKvi KZ©K
†NvwlZ Kg©m~wPi Av‡jv‡K evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖ ̄‘Z Ki‡e|
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i m‡1⁄2 wgj †i‡L Kvw•ÿZ djvdj AR©‡bi Rb ̈ mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v mswkøó A_©-
eQ‡ii ev‡RU eiv‡Ïi Av‡jv‡K evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Kvh©μgmg~n wPwýZ Ki‡e|
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i cÖ_g Lmov cÖYqb Ki‡e Ges
`ßi/ms ̄’vi cÖavb evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Lmov Aby‡gv`bc~e©K mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M †cÖiY
Ki‡e|
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi mswkøó AbywefvM Lmov evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Ici gZvgZ
(feedback)/mycvwik cÖ`vb Ki‡e|
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ we‡klÁ cyj Pzw3i Lmov ch©v‡jvPbv Ki‡e|
Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ we‡klÁ cy‡ji mycvwik AšÍfz©3 K‡i evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
ms‡kvab/cwigvR©bc~e©K Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wU‡gi Aby‡gv`b mv‡c‡ÿ gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi
ev‡RU e ̈e ̄’vcbv KwgwU‡Z Dc ̄’vcb Ki‡Z n‡e|
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi ev‡RU e ̈e ̄’vcbv KwgwU KZ©...K Aby‡gvw`Z nIqvi ci `ßi/ms ̄’v cÖavb Ges
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi mwP‡ei g‡a ̈ evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿwiZ Ki‡Z n‡e|
̄^vÿwiZ evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^ ̄^ `ßi/ms ̄’vi I‡qemvB‡U cÖKvk Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z cÖK...Z AR©b ˆÎgvwmK wfwË‡Z mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi ev‡RU e ̈e ̄’vcbv
KwgwU KZ©...K ch©v‡jvPbv Kiv n‡e| jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z AR©b wbwðZ Ki‡Z G msμvšÍ wUg cÖ‡qvRbxq
wb‡`©kbv cÖ`vb Ki‡e|
3: evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb c×wZ
4: evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖwμqv 2016-17
4.1 evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb I Aby‡gv`b
4.2 Kg©m¤úv`b cwiexÿY
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A 38
APPENDIX 5

4.3 Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb
gv‡m AwR©Z djvdjmn GKwU Aa©-evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b ̄^ ̄^ gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M †cÖiY Ki‡e|
cÖ ̄‘ZK...Z Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ KvwiMix KwgwUi wbKU
Dc ̄’vcb Kiv n‡e|
ermiv‡šÍ `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg cÖwZwU `ßi/ms ̄’vi wba©vwiZ jÿ ̈gvÎvi
weci‡Z AwR©Z djvdj D‡jøLc~e©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b cÖ ̄‘Z Ki‡e|
cÖ ̄‘ZK...Z g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v wba©vwiZ Zvwi‡Li g‡a ̈ ̄^ ̄^ gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M
†cÖiY Ki‡e|
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A_©-eQ‡ii Qq gvm AwZμvšÍ nIqvi ci cÖ‡Z ̈K `ßi/ms ̄’v wba©vwiZ jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z Qq
5. evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i mgqm~wP 2016-17
K. evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb I Aby‡gv`b
mgqmxgv
21 GwcÖj 2016
28 GwcÖj 2016
02 †g 2016
15 †g 2016
17 †g 2016
19 †g 2016
22-26 †g 2016
05-09 Ryb 2016
16 Ryb 2016
21-23 Ryb 2016
26-30 Ryb 2016
30 Ryb 2016
welq
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖ ̄‘‡Zi Rb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’v‡K
Aby‡iva Ávcb
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg MVb
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 msμvšÍ bxwZgvjvi Ici
cÖwkÿY
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 1g Lmov cÖYqb
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 1g Lmov Aby‡gv`b
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i P‚ovšÍ Lmov mswkøó
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi mswkøó Abywefv‡M †cÖiY
Lmov evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Ici djveZ©K
(feedback)/mycvwik cÖ`vb
`ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Lmov
ch©v‡jvPbv
Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ we‡klÁ cy‡ji
mycvwik AšÍfz©3 K‡i evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
P‚ovšÍKiY
`ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 Aby‡gv`b
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿi
`ßi/ms ̄’vi I‡qemvB‡U evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b
Pzw3 cÖKvk
ev ̄ÍevqbKvix KZ©...cÿ
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
`ßi/ms ̄’v
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
`ßi/ms ̄’vi cÖavb
`ßi/ms ̄’v
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi mswkøó
AbywefvM
Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ
we‡klÁ cyj
Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi ev‡RU
e ̈e ̄’vcbv KwgwU
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM I `ßi/ms ̄’v
A 39

mgqmxgv
Kg©m¤úv`b cwiexÿY
ga ̈-A‡±vei 2016
ga ̈-Rvbyqvwi 2017
ga ̈-GwcÖj 2017
ga ̈-RyjvB 2017
Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb
10 RyjvB 2016
14 RyjvB 2016
22 Rvbyqvwi 2017
24 Rvbyqvwi 2017
welq
Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z ˆÎgvwmK AMÖMwZ
ch©v‡jvPbv
2015-16 A_©eQ‡ii evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i
evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b cÖ ̄‘ZKiY
2015-16 A_©eQ‡ii evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i
evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M `vwLj
2016-17 A_©eQ‡ii Aa©evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
cÖYqb
2016-17 A_©eQ‡ii Aa©evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M `vwLj
ev ̄ÍevqbKvix KZ©...cÿ
`ßi/ms ̄’vi ev‡RU e ̈e ̄’vcbv
KwgwU
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
`ßi/ms ̄’v
`ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
`ßi/ms ̄’v
6: evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 `vwLj cÖwμqv
mKj evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 03 (wZb) Kwc wba©vwiZ Zvwi‡L ̄^ ̄^ gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M †cÖiY Ki‡Z n‡e|
A 40
APPENDIX 5

gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
msμvšÍ bxwZgvjv 2016-17
gwš¿cwil` wefvM
MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKvi
A 41
Appendix 5(B)
* This policy document is not available in English

m~wPcÎ
weqq
c„ôv
†cÖÿvcU
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i KvVv‡gv
Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
DcμgwYKv
†mKkb 1: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, Kvh©μg, AMÖvwaKvi, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n
†mKkb 2: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎv
ms‡hvRbx 1: kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
ms‡hvRbx 2: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n, ev ̄ÍevqbKvix `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZ
ms‡hvRbx 3: gvV ch©v‡qi Ab ̈vb ̈ Kvh©vj‡qi wbKU mywbw`©ó Pvwn`v
g~j ̈vqb c×wZ
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 m¤úv`b cÖwμqv 2016-17
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i mgqm~wP 2016-17
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 `vwLj cÖwμqv
cwiwkó K evwl©K : Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i KvVv‡gv
cwiwkó L: 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii Rb ̈ Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n
cwiwkó M: ermiv‡šÍ evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vq‡bi D`vniY
A 42
APPENDIX 5

gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b
Pzw3 msμvšÍ bxwZgvjv, 2016-2017
1. †cÖÿvcU
2. wefvMxq/AvÂwjK I †Rjv ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i
KvVv‡gv
miKvi iƒcKí 2021-Gi h_vh_ ev ̄Íevq‡b `„pcÖwZÁ Ges mykvmb msnZKi‡Y m‡Pó| G Rb ̈ GKwU
Kvh©Ki, `ÿ Ges MwZkxj cÖkvmwbK e ̈e ̄’v GKvšÍ Acwinvh© e‡j miKvi g‡b K‡i| G cwi‡cÖwÿ‡Z
̄^”QZv I `vqe×Zv e„w×, m¤ú‡`i h_vh_ e ̈envi wbwðZKiY Ges cÖvwZôvwbK mÿgZv Dbœq‡bi Rb ̈
miKvwi `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡n Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv c×wZ cÖeZ©‡bi wm×všÍ MÖnY Kiv nq| 2014-15 A_©-
eQ‡i 48wU gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi m‡1⁄2 evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿ‡ii gva ̈‡g Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv
c×wZ Pvjy nq| 2015-16 A_©-eQ‡i 48wU gš¿Yvjq/wefvM Ges AvIZvaxb `ßi/ms ̄’vmg~‡ni m‡1⁄2
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿwiZ n‡q‡Q| 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡i 48wU gš¿Yvjq/wefvM, AvIZvaxb
`ßi/ms ̄’vmg~n QvovI G mKj `ßi/ms ̄’vi wefvMxq/AvÂwjK I †Rjv ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni m‡1⁄2
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿ‡ii wm×všÍ MÖnY Kiv n‡q‡Q| GB bxwZgvjv AbymiY K‡i wefvMxq/AvÂwjK
I †Rjv ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb I ev ̄Íevqb cwiexÿY Ki‡e|
wefvMxq/AvÂwjK I †Rjv ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi
Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ, DcμgwYKv Ges wbgœewY©Z †mKkb I ms‡hvRbxmg~n AšÍfz©3 _vK‡e:
†mKkb 1: iƒcKí (vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (mission), †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ (strategic objectives),
Kvh©vejx (functions)
†mKkb 2: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎv
ms‡hvRbx 1 : kã ms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
ms‡hvRbx 2 : Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n, ev ̄ÍevqbKvix BDwbU/kvLv Ges cwigvc c×wZ
ms‡hvRbx 3 : Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©‡bi †ÿ‡Î Ab ̈vb ̈ Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni Dci wbf©ikxjZv
wefvMxq/AvÂwjK I †Rjv ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i GKwU KvVv‡gv cwiwkó-K
G ms‡hvwRZ nj| D3 KvVv‡gv AbymiY K‡i mswkøó Kvh©vjq evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Lmov cÖ ̄‘Z
Ki‡e|
A 43

2.1 Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
2.2 DcμgwYKv
2.3 †mKkb 1: iƒcKí (vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (mission), †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ (strategic
objectives), Ges Kvh©vewj (functions)
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n g~jZ mivmwi bvMwiK‡`i †mev cÖ`vb K‡i _v‡K weavq Zv‡`i evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z Kvh©μ‡gi mvwe©K Z_ ̈vw`mn ms‡ÿ‡c Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi GKwU wPÎ Zz‡j aiv
cÖ‡qvRb| G As‡k mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi MZ 3 eQ‡ii cÖavb AR©bmg~n, Kg©m¤úv`‡bi †ÿ‡Î †h mKj
mgm ̈v ev P ̈v‡jÄ i‡q‡Q †m ̧wj Ges fwel ̈‡Z G Kvh©vjq Kx Kx cÖavb jÿ ̈ AR©b Ki‡Z Pvq Zvi
cwiKíbv m¤ú‡K© ms‡ÿ‡c Av‡jvKcvZ Ki‡e| ZvQvov, 2016-17 A_© eQ‡ii m¤¢ve ̈ cÖavb AR©bmg~n-
G As‡k ms‡ÿ‡c eY©bv Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i ïiæ‡Z GKwU DcμgwYKv _vK‡e, hv‡Z GB Pzw3i D‡Ïk ̈, cÿmg~n Ges
Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z djvdjmg~n AR©‡bi wel‡q Zv‡`i m¤§Z nIqv m¤ú‡K© D‡jøL _vK‡e|
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n g~jZ mswkøó Awa`ßi/ms ̄’vi iƒcKí (vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (mission),
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n ev ̄Íevq‡bi Rb ̈ KvR K‡i weavq mswkøó Awa`ßi/ms ̄’vi iƒcKí, Awfjÿ ̈ Ges
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vj‡qi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e|
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n ̄^ ̄^ gš¿Yvjq/wefvM A_ev mswkøó Awa`ßi/ms ̄’v KZ©...K Zv‡`i‡K †h mKj
Kv‡Ri `vwqZ¡ cÖ`vb Kiv n‡q‡Q Zvi wfwË‡Z Zv‡`i Kvh©vejxi ZvwjKv cÖ ̄‘Z Ki‡e| Kvh©vejxi ZvwjKv
mswÿß nIqv evÃbxq|
Kjvg 1: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni ZvwjKv
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni Rb ̈ †mKkb 1-G ewY©Z †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ QvovI KwZcq Avewk ̈K
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ AšÍfz©3 _vK‡e| gvV ch©v‡qi mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`b me©‡gvU 100 gv‡bi
wfwË‡Z cwigvc Kiv n‡e| GB 100 gv‡bi g‡a ̈ gvV ch©v‡qi ̄^ ̄^ Kvh©vj‡qi †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni
Rb ̈ 85 b¤^i Ges Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z 15 b¤^i wba©vwiZ _vK‡e| Avwewk ̈K
Kvh©vewj (functions)
†mKkb 2: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎv
A 44
APPENDIX 5

†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n miKvwi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ RvZxq KwgwU KZ©...K Aby‡gvw`Z Ges gvV
ch©v‡qi mKj Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni Rb ̈ mgfv‡e cÖ‡hvR ̈ n‡e| cwiwkó ÔLÕ-G Avewk ̈K †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i
ZvwjKv ms‡hvRb Kiv nj|
Kjvg 2: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~‡ni Av‡cwÿK gvb eivÏKiY
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n ̧iæZ¡ I Zvrc‡h©i μgvbymv‡i D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e| †m‡ÿ‡Î AwaKZi ̧iæZ¡m¤úbœ
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i gvb †ewk n‡e Ges Kg ̧iæZ¡c~Y© D‡Ï‡k ̈i gvb Kg n‡e|
Kjvg 3: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n AR©‡bi j‡ÿ ̈ Kvh©μg mywbw`©óKiY
cÖwZwU †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈ c~i‡Yi j‡ÿ ̈ D3 D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z cÖ‡qvRbxq Kvh©μg wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e|
KL‡bv KLv‡bv GKwU †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z GK ev GKvwaK Kvh©μgI _vK‡Z cv‡i| D‡jøL ̈ †h,
evwl©K Kg©m¤ú`b Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z mKj Kvh©μg ev‡RU eiv‡Ïi Av‡jv‡K MÖnY Ki‡Z n‡e| Dbœqb A_ev
Abybœqb ev‡R‡U mywbw`©ó eivÏ †bB Ggb †Kvb Kvh©μg G‡Z AšÍfz©3 Kiv hv‡e bv|
Kjvg 4: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges Zvi GKKmg~n mywbw`©óKiY
Kjvg 3-G ewY©Z cÖwZwU Kvh©μ‡gi Rb ̈ gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n‡K GK ev GKvwaK Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e hv Øviv eQi †k‡l D3 Kvh©μg ev ̄Íevq‡bi AMÖMwZ cwigvc Kiv n‡e| Kg©m¤úv`b
m~PKmg~n wba©vi‡Yi †ÿ‡Î †h †Kvb iKg ˆØZZv cwinvi Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kjvg 5: Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎv wba©viY
Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎv cwigv‡ci GKK GB Kjv‡g D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e| m~PKmg~n cwigv‡ci
j‡ÿ ̈ h_vh_ GKK e ̈envi Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kjvg 6: Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki wecix‡Z gvb (weight) eÈbKiY
†Kvb †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z GKvwaK Kvh©μg _vK‡j cÖwZwU Kvh©μ‡gi ev ̄Íevqb-AMÖMwZ
g~j ̈vq‡bi Rb ̈ GK ev GKvwaK Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK _vK‡e Ges cÖwZwU Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki GKwU wba©vwiZ
gvb (weight) _vK‡e| wewfbœ Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki gvb Ggbfv‡e wba©viY Ki‡Z n‡e hv‡Z me ̧wj
m~P‡Ki †gvU gvb mswkøó †KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i wecix‡Z eivÏK...Z gv‡bi mgvb nq|
Kjvg 7 I 8: GB KjvgØ‡q h_vμ‡g 2014-2015 Ges 2015-2016 A_©eQ‡ii cÖK...Z AR©b D‡jøL
Ki‡Z n‡e|
A 45

Kjvg 9-13: G Kjvg ̧‡jv‡Z Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎv D‡jøL _v‡K| mywbw`©ó jÿ ̈gvÎv n‡”Q
Kg©m¤úv`b Dbœq‡bi PvwjKvkw3| myZivs jÿ ̈gvÎv GKBm‡1⁄2 AR©b‡hvM ̈ Ges D”PvKv•ÿx nIqv DwPZ|
jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n‡K wbgœiƒc 5 `dv † ̄‹‡j web ̈ ̄Í Ki‡Z n‡e:
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
D‡jøL ̈, †Kvb Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z cÖK...Z AR©b 60 Gi wb‡P n‡j cÖvß gvb 0 (k~Y ̈)
aiv n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i jÿ ̈gvÎv wba©vi‡Yi †ÿ‡Î mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi m‡1⁄2 m¤ú„3 †UKmB Dbœqb
jÿ ̈gvÎv, 7g cÂevwl©K cwiKíbv Ges ga ̈-‡gqv`x ev‡RU KvVv‡gvq ewY©Z jÿ ̈gvÎvq wea„Z welqmg~n
we‡ePbv Kiv †h‡Z cv‡i| jÿ ̈gvÎv wba©vi‡Yi †ÿ‡Î c~e©eZ©x `yB eQ‡ii cÖK...Z AR©b I AR©‡bi cÖe„w×,
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi mÿgZv Ges weivRgvb ev ̄ÍeZv we‡ePbv Ki‡Z n‡e|
Kjvg 14-15: 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii jÿ ̈gvÎvi wfwË‡Z 2017-18 Ges 2018-19 A_©-eQ‡ii
cÖ‡ÿwcZ jÿ ̈gvÎv 14 I 15-G D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z e ̈eüZ wewfbœ kãms‡ÿ‡ci c~Y©iƒc ms‡hvRbx 1-G mwbœ‡ek Ki‡Z n‡e|
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i ms‡hvRbxq 2-G †mKkb 2-G DwjøwLZ Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n, ev ̄ÍevqbKvix
Kvh©vjqmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZ I DcvËm~Î D‡jøL Ki‡Z n‡e|
gvV ch©v‡qi Ab ̈ Kvh©vj‡qi wbKU cÖZ ̈vwkZ mnvqZv Ges KwZcq wba©vwiZ Kg©m¤úv`b m~P‡Ki mdjZvi
†ÿ‡Î gvV ch©v‡qi Ab ̈ Kvh©vj‡qi Ici wbf©ikxjZvi welqwU ms‡hvRbx 3-G D‡jøL _vK‡e| GB
wbf©ikxjZvi gvÎv mywbw`©ó I cwigvc‡hvM ̈ n‡Z n‡e| †h‡nZz GB wbf©ikxjZv gvV ch©v‡qi Ab ̈
Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`‡bi m‡1⁄2 m¤ú„3 n‡e †m‡nZz wbf©ikxjZvi gvÎv wbe©vP‡bi †ÿ‡Î mZK©Zv Aej¤^b
Kiv mgxwPb n‡e|
AmvaviY
AwZ DËg
DËg
PjwZ gvb
PjwZ gv‡bi wb‡gœ
2 6. kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
2 7. Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n, ev ̄ÍevqbKvix Kvh©vjqmg~n Ges cwigvc c×wZi weeiY
2.8 gvV ch©v‡qi Ab ̈vb ̈ Kvh©vj‡qi wbKU mywbw`©ó Pvwn`v
A 46
APPENDIX 5

3. g~j ̈vqb c×wZ
4.evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 m¤úv`b cÖwμqv 2016-17
ermiv‡šÍ mKj Kvh©vj‡qi 2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3‡Z DwjøwLZ Kvh©μ‡gi
wecix‡Z ̄^ ̄^ Kvh©vjq evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b cÖ ̄‘Zc~e©K mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY Ki‡e| wbqš¿YKvix
`ßi/ms ̄’v KZ©...K Zv hvPvB Kiv n‡e|
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3, `ßi/ms ̄’vi evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3, iƒcKí 2021 GmwWwR (SDG), 7g cÂevwl©K cwiKíbv, gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
KZ©...K M„nxZ bxwZgvjv/`wjj, Ges mg‡q mg‡q miKvi KZ©...K †NvwlZ Kg©m~wPi Av‡jv‡K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb Ki‡e|
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ï‡k ̈i m‡1⁄2 wgj †i‡L Kvw•ÿZ djvdj AR©‡bi Rb ̈ gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n
mswkøó A_©-eQ‡ii ev‡RU eiv‡Ïi Av‡jv‡K evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Kvh©μgmg~n, Kvh©μ‡gi
wecix‡Z Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n Ges jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n wba©viY Ki‡e|
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 1g Lmov cÖ ̄‘Z Ki‡e|
cÖ ̄‘ZK...Z evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i Lmov Kvh©vjq cÖavb Aby‡gv`b Ki‡eb Ges mswkøó
`ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY Ki‡eb|
gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjq n‡Z cÖvß evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3mg~n mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ wUg KZ©...K ch©v‡jvPbv Ki‡Z n‡e|
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv msμvšÍ wU‡gi mcvwikmg~n AšÍfz©3 K‡i evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 P‚ovšÍ K‡i mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY Ki‡Z n‡e|
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi ev‡RU e ̈e ̄’vcbv KwgwU gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b
Pzw3mg~n Aby‡gv`b Ki‡e| Aby‡gvw`Z evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 bxwZgvjvq ewY©Z mg‡qi g‡a ̈
̄^vÿi Ki‡Z n‡e|
̄^vÿwiZ evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^ ̄^ Kvh©vj‡qi I‡qemvB‡U cÖKvk Ki‡Z n‡e|
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~‡ni Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z cÖK...Z AR©b
ˆÎgvwmK wfwË‡Z cwiexÿY Ki‡Z n‡e| jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z AR©b wbwðZ Ki‡Z mswkøó
`ßi/ms ̄’v cÖ‡qvRbxq wb‡`©kbv cÖ`vb Ki‡e|
4.1 evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb I Aby‡gv`b
4 2. Kg©m¤úv`b cwiexÿY
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A 47

4 3. Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb
Qq gv‡m AwR©Z djvdjmn GKwU Aa©-evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b ̄^ ̄^ `ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY Ki‡e|
ermiv‡šÍ gvV ch©v‡qi cÖwZwU Kvh©vjq wba©vwiZ jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z AwR©Z djvdj D‡jøLc~e©K
Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb msμvšÍ evwl©K cÖwZ‡e`b cÖ ̄‘Z K‡i wba©vwiZ Zvwi‡Li g‡a ̈ mswkøó
`ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY Ki‡e|
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v mgwš^Z g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M `vwLj Ki‡e|
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A_©-eQ‡ii Qq gvm AwZμvšÍ nIqvi ci gvV ch©v‡qi Kvh©vjqmg~n wba©vwiZ jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i mgqm~wP 2016-2017
K. evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖYqb I Aby‡gv`b
mgqmxgv
28 GwcÖj 2016
05 †g 2016
10 †g 2016
17 †g 2016
22 †g 2016
05-09 Ryb 2016
16 Ryb 2016
21-23 Ryb 2016
26-30 Ryb 2016
30 Ryb 2016
Kg©m¤úv`b cwiexÿY
ga ̈-A‡±vei 2016
ga ̈-Rvbyqvwi 2017
ga ̈-GwcÖj 2017
ga ̈-RyjvB 2017
welq
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 cÖ ̄‘‡Zi Rb ̈ gvV ch©v‡qi
Awdmmg~n‡K Aby‡iva Ávcb
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 msμvšÍ bxwZgvjvi Ici
gvV ch©v‡qi Kg©KZ©v‡`i cÖwkÿY
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 1g Lmov cÖ ̄‘ZKiY
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i 1g Lmov Aby‡gv`b
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i P‚ovšÍ Lmov mswkøó
`ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY
gvV ch©v‡qi Awdmmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3i
P‚ovšÍ Lmov ch©v‡jvPbv
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wU‡gi
mycvwik AšÍfz©3 K‡i evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
P‚ovšÍKiY
gvV ch©v‡qi Awdmmg~‡ni evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
Aby‡gv`b
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿi
̄^ ̄^ Kvh©vj‡qi I‡qemvB‡U evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
cÖKvk
Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎvi wecix‡Z ˆÎgvwmK AMÖMwZ
ch©v‡jvPbv
ev ̄ÍevqbKvix KZ©...cÿ
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi cÖavb
mswkøó Kvh©vjq
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi
Kg©m¤úv`b e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vi ev‡RU
e ̈e ̄’vcbv KwgwU
`ßi/ms ̄’v
mswkøó Kvh©vjq
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v
A 48
APPENDIX 5

mgqmxgv
Kg©m¤úv`b g~j ̈vqb
15 Rvbyqvwi 2017
16 Rvbyqvwi 2017
22 Rvbyqvwi 2017
26 Rvbyqvwi 2017
welq
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii Aa©-evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
cÖYqb
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii Aa©-evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’vq †cÖiY
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii Aa©-evwl©K g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
ch©v‡jvPbv
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii mgwš^Z g~j ̈vqb cÖwZ‡e`b
mswkøó gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M `vwLj
ev ̄ÍevqbKvix KZ©...cÿ
mswkøó Kvh©vj‡qi Kg©m¤úv`b
e ̈e ̄’vcbv wUg
mswkøó Kvh©vjq
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v
mswkøó `ßi/ms ̄’v
6. evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 `vwLj cÖwμqv
2016-17 A_©-eQ‡ii mKj evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 G msμvšÍ bxwZgvjvq ewY©Z mg‡qi g‡a ̈ mswkøó
`ßi/ms ̄’vq `vwLj Ki‡Z n‡e|
A 49

MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKvi
[`ßi/ms ̄’v cÖav‡bi c`ex], [`ßi/ms ̄’vi bvg]
Ges
mwPe, K...wl gš¿Yvj‡qi Gi g‡a ̈ ̄^vÿwiZ
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
1 RyjvB 2015- 30 Ryb 2016
A 50
APPENDIX 5
Appendix 5(C)
* This policy document is not available in English

m~wPcÎ
Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
DcμgwYKv
†mKkb 1: iƒcKí (Vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (Mission), †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n Ges Kvh©vejx
†mKkb 2: wewfbœ Kvh©μ‡gi P‚ovšÍ djvdj/cÖfve (Outcome/Impact)
†mKkb 3: †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, AMÖvwaKvi, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b Ges jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n
ms‡hvRbx 1: kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
ms‡hvRbx 2: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n, ev ̄ÍevqbKvix DBs/Awdm/BDwbU/cÖKí Ges cwigvc c×wZ
ms‡hvRbx 3: Kg©m¤úv`b jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©‡bi †ÿ‡Î Ab ̈vb ̈ `ßi/ms ̄’vi Dci wbf©ikxjZv
A 51

Kg©m¤úv`‡bi mvwe©K wPÎ
(Overview Performance)
mv¤úÖwZK AR©b, P ̈v‡jÄ Ges fwel ̈r cwiKíbv:
mv¤úÖwZK eQimg~‡ni (3 eQi) cÖavb AR©bmg~n
mgm ̈v Ges P ̈v‡jÄmg~n
fwel ̈r cwiKíbv
2015 - 2016 A_©eQ‡ii m¤¢ve ̈ cÖavb AR©bmg~n
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
A 52
APPENDIX 5

DcμgwYKv (Preamble)
K...wl gš¿Yvj‡qi AvIZvaxb [cÖwZôv‡bi bvg.......] Gi [cÖwZôv‡bi cÖav‡bi c`ex.................]
Ges
MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKv‡ii K...wl gš¿Yvj‡qi `vwq‡Z¡ wb‡qvwRZ gvbbxq gš¿xi cÖwZwbwa wn‡m‡e mwPe,
K...wl gš¿Yvjq Gi g‡a ̈ 2015 mv‡ji.........................gv‡mi .....................................ZvwiL
GB
evwl©K Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3 ̄^vÿwiZ nj|
GB Pzw3‡Z ̄^vÿiKvix Dfqcÿ wb¤œwjwLZ welqmg~‡n m¤§Z n‡jb:
gš¿Yvj‡qi iƒcKí (Vision), Awfjÿ ̈ (Mission), †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n Ges Kvh©vejx
†mKkb 1
1.1 iƒcKí (Vision):
1.2 Awfjÿ ̈ (Mission):
1.3 †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n (Strategic Objectives):
1.4 Kvh©vejx (Functions):
A 53

*mvgwqK (Provisional) Z_ ̈
cÖ‡ÿcY (Projection)
P‚ovšÍ djvdj/cÖfve
(Outcome/
Impact)
Kg©m¤úv`b
m~PKmg~n
(Performance
Indicators)
GKK
(Unit)
cÖK...Z*
2014- 15
DcvËm~Î
[Source(s) of
data]
wfwË eQi
2013- 14
jÿ ̈gvÎv
2015- 16
wba©vwiZ jÿ ̈gvÎv AR©‡bi †ÿ‡Î
†hŠ_fv‡e `vwqZ¡cÖvß
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM/ ms ̄’vmg~‡ni bvg
2016- 17 2017 - 18
†mKkb 2
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi wewfbœ Kvh©μ‡gi P‚ovšÍ djvdj/ cÖfve (Outcome/Impact)
A 54
APPENDIX 5

†mKkb 3
†KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈, AMÖvwaKvi, Kvh©μg, Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK Ges jÿ ̈gvÎvmg~n
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
(Weight of
Strategic
Objectives)
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic
Objectives)
Kvh©μg
(Activities)
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
1.1 wewfbœ
dm‡ji
D”Pdjbkxj
RvZ I cÖhyw3
DTM¢veb
1.2 jeYv3Zv,
Liv Ges
RjvgMœZvm wnòz
RvZ I cÖhyw3
DTM¢veb
1.3 K...l‡Ki
wbKU DTM¢vweZ
RvZ Ges
cÖhyw3i
m¤úÖmviY
1| dm‡ji
Drcv`b I
Drcv`bkxj
Zv e„w×
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
(Performance
Indicators)
Kgm© ¤úv`b
mP~ ‡Ki gvb
(Weight of
Performance
Indicator)
GKK
(Unit)
wfwË eQi
(Base Year)
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
1.1.1 DTM¢vweZ
RvZ
1.1.2 DTM¢vweZ
cÖhyw3
1.2.1 DTM¢vweZ
RvZ
1.2.2 DTM¢vweZ
cÖhyw3
1.3.1 cÖwkwÿZ
e ̈w3/K...lK
1.3.2 M‡elYv
cÖwZôvb KZ©...K
cÖwkwÿZ
m¤úÖmviY
Kg©KZ©v/Kg©x
1.3.3 ̄’vwcZ
cÖ`k©bx
1.3.4
Av‡qvwRZ
†mwgbvi/
IqvK©kc
1.3.5 K...wl
m¤úÖmviY
Awa`ß‡ii wbKU
n ̄ÍvšÍwiZ RvZ
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
(jÿ)
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
(jÿ)
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
(Target/Criteria value for FY 2015-16)
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡Mi †KŠkjMZ D‡Ïk ̈mg~n
A 55

†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
(Weight of
Strategic
Objectives)
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic
Objectives)
Kvh©μg
(Activities)
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
(Performance
Indicators)
Kgm© ¤úv`b
mP~ ‡Ki gvb
(Weight of
Performance
Indicator)
GKK
(Unit)
wfwË eQi
(Base
Year)
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
(Target/Criteria value for FY 2015-16)
1.4 K...wl wel‡q
B-Z_ ̈ †mev
cÖ`vb
1.5 Lv` ̈gvb I
cywó wel‡q
cÖPviYv,
cÖKvkbv, mfv I
Kg©kvjvi
gva ̈‡g
m‡PZbZv e„w×
2.1 wba©vwiZ
g~‡j ̈ mvi
mieivn
wbwðZKiY
2.2 †mP
hš¿cvwZ msMÖn
Ges Gi
mnRjf ̈Zv e„w×
2. K...wl
DcKi‡Yi
mnRjf ̈Zv
I mieivn
e„w×KiY
1.3.6 K...wl
m¤úÖmviY
Awa`ß‡ii wbKU
n ̄ÍvšÍwiZ cÖhyw3
1.3.7 gvV
ch©v‡q n ̄ÍvšÍwiZ
RvZ
1.3.8 gvV
ch©v‡q n ̄ÍvšÍwiZ
cÖhyw3
1.4.1 MwVZ
K...lK MÖæc/K¬ve
1.4.2
GAvBwmwmÕi
myweav‡fvMx
K...lK
1.5.1 cÖwkwÿZ
e ̈w3
1.5.2 Av‡qvwRZ
mfv/IqvK©kc
2.1.1
mieivnK...Z
BDwiqv mvi
2.1.2
mieivnK...Z
wUGmwc mvi
2.1.3
mieivnK...Z
wWGwc mvi
2.1.4
mieivnK...Z
GgIwc mvi
2.2.1
mieivnK...Z †mP
hš¿cvwZ
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
(jÿ)
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
jÿ
†g.Ub
jÿ
†g.Ub
jÿ
†g.Ub
jÿ
†g.Ub
msL ̈v
A 56
APPENDIX 5

†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
(Weight of
Strategic
Objectives)
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic
Objectives)
Kvh©μg
(Activities)
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
(Performance
Indicators)
Kgm© ¤úv`b
mP~ ‡Ki gvb
(Weight of
Performance
Indicator)
GKK
(Unit)
wfwË eQi
(Base
Year)
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
(Target/Criteria value for FY 2015-16)
2.3 f‚-
Dcwiw ̄’Z cvwbi
e ̈envi
DrmvwnZ Kivi
Rb ̈ ÿz`a †mP
Kvh©μg
m¤úÖmviY,
Rjve×Zv I
RjgMœZv
`~ixKi‡Yi
gva ̈‡g Avev`x
Rwgi AvIZv
e„w×
2.4 weaWvi,
wfwË, cÖZ ̈wqZ
I gvb‡NvwlZ
exR Drcv`b,
cÖZ ̈qb, msiÿY
I weZiY
2.5 jeYv3Zv,
Liv Ges
RjgMœZv mwnòy
Rv‡Zi weaWvi,
wfwË I
gvb‡NvwlZ exR
Drcv`b,
cÖZ ̈qb I
weZiY
2.3.1
m¤úÖmvwiZ †mP
GjvKv
2.3.2 e„w×cÖvß
Avev`x Rwgi
cwigvY
2.4.1 Drcvw`Z
weaWvi exR
2.4.2 Drcvw`Z
wfwË exR
2.4.3 Drcvw`Z
cÖZ ̈wqZ exR
2.4.4 Drcvw`Z
gvb‡NvwlZ exR
2.4.5
weZiYK...Z weaWvi
exR
2.4.6
weZiYK...Z wfwË
exR
2.4.7
weZiYK...Z
cÖZ ̈wqZ exR
2.4.8
weZiYK...Z
gvb‡NvwlZ exR
2.5.1
cÖwZK‚jZv
mnbkxj Rv‡Zi
Drcvw`Z exR
2.5.2
cÖwZK‚jZv
mnbkxj Rv‡Zi
weZiYK...Z exR
†n±i
(jÿ)
†n±i
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g.Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
(jÿ)
†g.Ub
(jÿ)
†g. Ub
†g.Ub
A 57

†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
(Weight of
Strategic
Objectives)
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic
Objectives)
Kvh©μg
(Activities)
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
(Performance
Indicators)
Kgm© ¤úv`b
mP~ ‡Ki gvb
(Weight of
Performanc
e Indicator)
GKK
(Unit)
wfwË eQi
(Base
Year)
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
(Target/Criteria value for FY 2015-16)
msL ̈v
†g. Ub
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
(jÿ)
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
†KvwU
UvKv
msL ̈v
2.6.1 cixwÿZ
ex‡Ri bgybv
2.7.1
weZiYK...Z Zyjv
exR
3.1.1 RixcK...Z
Dc‡Rjv
3.1.2 gyw`aZ
Dc‡Rjv
wW‡i±ix
3.2.1 we‡køwlZ
g„wËKv bgybv
3.3.1 cÖwkwÿZ
K...lK
3.3.2 ̄’vwcZ
K‡¤úvó ̄‘c
4.1.1 I‡qe
mvB‡U evRvi
g~j ̈ cÖKvk
4.1.2 cÖKvwkZ
ey‡jwUb
4.1.3 cÖKvwkZ
cÖwZ‡e`b
4.2.1 cÖwkwÿZ
K...lK
4.2.2 RgvK...Z
dm‡ji Ici
cÖ`vbK...Z FY
2.6 ex‡Ri mwVK
gvb wbav© iY
2.7 Zyjv ex‰Ri
wRwbs I wecYb
3.1 gw„ ËKv
Rix‡ci gva ̈‡g
gw„ ËKv I f-‚
m¤ú`
wPwýZKiY Ges
Drcv`b mÿgZv
Abhy vqx fw‚ g I
gw„ ËKv m¤ú‡`i
†kwÖ Yweb ̈vm
3.2 Dc‡Rjv I
BDwbqb ch©v‡q
gvwU cixÿvi
myweavw`
m¤úÖmviY
3.3 ˆRe mvi,
meyR mvi I
RxevYy mv‡ii
e ̈envi
K...lK‡`i wbKU
RbwcÖqKiY
4.1 K...wl wecYb
Ges Dbœqb
wel‡q cÖPviYv I
Z_ ̈ msiÿY
4.2 evRvi
Dbœq‡b cÖwkÿY
I Ab ̈vb ̈
mnvqZv cÖ`vb
3. K...wl f‚-
m¤ú`
e ̈e ̄’vcbvi
Dbœqb I
iÿYv‡eÿY
4. K...wl
c‡Y ̈i ch©vß
mieivn I
Dchy3 g~j ̈
cÖvwß
wbwðZKi‡Y
mnvqZv
A 58
APPENDIX 5

[1.1] cwiewZ©Z
dig ̈v‡U
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
Ges gvV
ch©v‡qi
`ßimg~‡n
wmwU‡Rb PvU©vi
cÖYqb
[1.2] Awf‡hvM
cÖwZKvi e ̈e ̄’v
ev ̄Íevqb
[1.3] †mev
cÖwμqvq DTM¢veb
Kvh©μg
ev ̄Íevqb
[1] DTM¢veb I
Awf‡hvM
cÖwZKv‡ii
gva ̈‡g
†mevi
gv‡bvbœqb
[1.1.1]
cwiewZ©Z
dig ̈v‡U
gš¿Yvjq/wefv‡M
i wmwU‡Rb PvU©vi
I‡qemvB‡U
cÖKvwkZ
[1.1.2] gvV
ch©v‡qi
`ßimg~‡n
wmwU‡Rbm PvU©vi
cÖYxZ I
cÖKvwkZ
[1.2.1] Awf‡hvM
wb®úwËK...Z
[1.3.1]
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
Awa`ßi/ms ̄’v
mg~‡n Kgc‡ÿ
GKwU K‡i
AbjvBb †mev
PvjyK...Z
ZvwiL
ZvwiL
%
ZvwiL
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
Kvh©μg
cÖ‡ÿcY
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
Kg©m¤úv`b
m~P‡Ki gvb
GKK
wfwË eQi
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
30/9/
30/11/
30/11/
4.3 Kw...l
D‡` ̈v3v‡`i
chÖ wy3 I KvwiMix
mnvqZv c`Ö vb
Ges
G‡MvÖ c‡Ö mwms I
Kw...l e ̈emvq
wewb‡qvM
DrmvwnZ Kiv
4.3.1
mnvqZvcÖvß K...wl
e ̈emvi
D‡` ̈v3vmnvqZv
cÖvß K...wl e ̈emvi
D‡` ̈v3v
msL ̈v
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
(Weight of
Strategic
Objectives)
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
(Strategic
Objectives)
Kvh©μg
(Activities)
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
(Projection)
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
(Performance
Indicators)
Kgm© ¤úv`b
mP~ ‡Ki gvb
(Weight of
Performanc
e Indicator)
GKK
(Unit)
wfwË eQi
(Base
Year)
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
(Target/Criteria value for FY 2015-16)
eva ̈Zvg~jK Kvh©μg I Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
A 59

†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ï‡k ̈i
gvb
†KŠkjMZ
D‡Ïk ̈
Kvh©μg
cÖ‡ÿcY
2016-17
cÖ‡ÿcY
2017-18
AmvaviY
100%
AwZDËg
90%
DËg
80%
PjwZgvb
70%
Kg©m¤úv`b m~PK
Kg©m¤úv`b
m~P‡Ki gvb
GKK
wfwË eQi
2013-14
cÖK...Z AR©b*
2014 - 15
jÿ ̈gvÎv/wbY©vqK 2015 - 16
[2.1] Lmov
evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
`vwLj
[2.2] evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b
g~j ̈vqb
cÖwZ‡e`b `vwLj
[2.3] evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b Pzw3
ev ̄Íevqb
cwiexÿY
[2.4] AvIZvaxb
ms ̄’vi ms‡M
evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b
msμvšÍ
mg‡SvZv ̄§viK
̄^vÿi
[3.1] RvZxq
ï×vPvi †KŠkj
ev ̄Íevqb
[2] `ÿZvi
m‡1⁄2 evwl©K
Kg©m¤úv`b
Pzw3
ev ̄Íevqb
[3] cÖkvmwbK
ms ̄‹vi I
ˆbwZKZvi
Dbœqb
[1.3.2]
gš¿Yvjq/wefvM
I Awa`ßi/
ms ̄’vmg~‡n
Kgc‡ÿ GKwU
K‡i GKwU K‡i
†mev cÖwμqv
mnRxK...Z
[2.1.1] cÖwkÿY
mgvwßi ci
wba©vwiZ
mgqmxgvi g‡a ̈
Lmov Pzw3
`vwLjK...Z
[2.2.1] wba©vwiZ
Zvwi‡L g~j ̈vqb
cÖwZ‡e`b
`vwLjK...Z
[2.3.1]
Aa©evwl©K I
ˆÎgvwmK
cÖwZ‡e`b `vwLj
[2.4.1]
mg‡SvZv ̄§viK
̄^vÿwiZ
[3.1.1] ï×vPvi
ev ̄Íevqb
cwiexÿY
KvVv‡gv
(monitoring
framework)
cÖYxZ
[3.1.2]
Ryb/2016 Gi
g‡a ̈ ï×vPvi
Kg©cwiKíbvi
Kvhμ© g ev ̄eÍ vwqZ
ZvwiL
w`b
ZvwiL
msL ̈v
ZvwiL
ZvwiL
%
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
30/09/
31/8/
30/9/
30/11/
PjwZgv‡bi
wb‡gœ
60%
A 60
APPENDIX 5

Avwg, [c`ex], [cÖwZôv‡bi bvg] MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKv‡ii K...wl gš¿Yvj‡qi mwP‡ei wbKU A1⁄2xKvi
KiwQ †h GB Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z djvdj AR©‡b m‡Pó _vKe|
Avwg, mwPe, K...wl gš¿Yvjq, MYcÖRvZš¿x evsjv‡`k miKv‡ii gvbbxq K...wl gš¿xi mwPe wn‡m‡e [cÖwZôv‡bi
bvg], [cÖav‡bi c`ex] wbKU A1⁄2xKvi KiwQ †h GB Pzw3‡Z ewY©Z djvdj AR©‡b cÖ‡qvRbxq mn‡hvwMZv
cÖ`vb Kie|
̄^vÿwiZ
.....................................................
............................................
[c`ex]
ZvwiL
[cÖwZôv‡bi bvg]
.....................................................
..............................................
mwPe
ZvwiL
K...wl gš¿Yvjq
A 61

ms‡hvRbx- 1
kãms‡ÿc (Acronyms)
A 62
APPENDIX 5

ms‡hvRbx- 2: Kg©m¤úv`b m~PKmg~n,ev ̄ÍevqbKvix gš¿Yvjq/wefvM/ms ̄’v Ges cwigvc
c×wZ Gi weeiY
ms‡hvRbx 3: Ab ̈vb ̈ cÖwZôv‡bi/.........................wefv‡Mi/wbKU cÖZ ̈vwkZ mywbw`©ó
Kg©m¤úv`b mnvqZvmg~n
μwgK
b¤^i
weeiY
mvaviY
gšÍe ̈
ev ̄ÍevqbKvix
BDwbU/cÖKí
c×wZ Ges
DcvËm~Î
Kg©m¤úv`b
m~PKmg~n cwigvc
cÖwZôv‡bi
aib
cÖwZôv‡bi
bvg
D3 cÖwZôv‡bi
wbKU mswkøó
gš¿Yvjq wefv‡Mi
/cÖZ ̈vwkZ
mnvqZv
mswkøó
Kg©m¤úv`b
m~PK
cÖZ ̈vkvi
†hŠw3KZv
cÖZ ̈vkv c~iY
bv n‡j m¤¢ve ̈
cÖfve
D3
cÖwZôv‡bi
wbKU
cÖZ ̈vkvi gvÎv
D‡jøL Kiæb
A 63

Annual Competence Assessment Form
APPENDIX 6
Activities
a.Cultivation
methods
(land
preparation,
sowing/tran
splanting
b. Fertilizer
management
c. Disease
identification
and
management
d. Insect pest
identification
and
management
e. Postharvest
management
No
Compe
tence
Technical
Area of
Extension
Assistance
1.1.Cereal Crop
Production
1.1 Boro Rice
Production
1.2 Transplant
Aman rice
production
1.3 Aus rice
production
1.4
1.5
2.Oilseed crops
production
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.Pulse crops
production
Partial
Compet
ence
Moder
ately
compe
tent
Competent
(training not
required)
Mostly
Compe
tent
Expert
(Training not
required)
A 64
APPENDIX 6

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
4. Root and
Tuber crops
production
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
5. Vegetable
production
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
6. Spice crops
production
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
7. Fruit crops
production
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
8. Flower
production
8.1
8.2
8.3
9.Sugarcane
production
9.1
9.2
A 65
Activities
No
Compe
tence
Technical
Area of
Extension
Assistance
Partial
Compet
ence
Moder
ately
compe
tent
Competent
(training not
required)
Mostly
Compe
tent
Expert
(Training not
required)

9.3
9.4
10. Corps
production in
homestead
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
11. Fiber
crops
production
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
12.Other crops
production
12.1
12.2
11.3
13. Nursery
management
13.1
13.2
14. Urban
agriculture
14.1
14.2
15.Post-harvest
management
of crops
15.1
*** Crops suitable to region are to be incorporated. Main and Cash crops will receive importance
A 66
Activities
No
Compe
tence
Technical
Area of
Extension
Assistance
Partial
Compet
ence
Moder
ately
compe
tent
Competent
(training not
required)
Mostly
Compe
tent
Expert
(Training not
required)
APPENDIX 6

APPENDIX 7(1)
TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION MONITORING SYSTEM (TEMS): TEMS
FORM 1- PRIMARY MONITORING FORM
(Applicable for District/Upazila/Block, one form should be completed for every event separately)
District: .................................. Upazila: ..................................... Block: ...................................
Crop: ................................... .. Season: ..................................... Year: .....................................
Extension method or Event type: ..................................................... Target group of farmers:
Large (male)/Small(male)/Large(female) Small(female)/All/Others
Technology name: ......................................................... Funding source: ........................... Total
cost of event ...........................
Venue of event: .............................................................................. Date: ....................................
Duration of event (hour/day): ...........................................
Reason for poor event performance:
A) Reason for poor attendance ( less than 75% of target):
........................................................................................
..................................................................................................................................................
Was publicity adequate for
the event?
Was venue appropriate?
Was timing appropriate?
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
(*****) No. of farmers who attended the event:
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large (over 1
hectare of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Total
Total
No of farmers who now think they know
how to use the technology/ideas
No of farmers who indent to test
the technology
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
%
%
%
%
%
%
A 67
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total

B) Reason for poor no. of farmers who now think they know how to use the technology/ ideas
(under50% of total attending farmer): ..........................................................................................
C) Reason for poor number of farmers who intend to test the technology (under 25% of total
attending farmer): ...........................................................................................................................
Result demonstration plot information:
AEZ no. .......................................
Land Type: High/Medium High/Medium/medium low/Low
Demonstration farmer’s category: (Large (male)/Small(male)/Large (female)/ Small(female)/
All/Others
Plot size: Demonstration Plot- .................................sq. m, Control Plot: ............................. sq.m
Date of establishment: Demonstration Plot: ............................. Control Plot: ............................
Was demo. site appropriate? Yes/No. If no, mention the reason: ...............................................
Was demo. timing appropriate? Yes/No. If no, mention the reason: ...........................................
st
A. How many farmers attended in the 1 field day
nd
B. How many farmers attended in the 2 field day?
st
nd
C. How many 1 field day participants also attended in the 2 field day?
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large (over 1 hectare
of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large (over 1 hectare
of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
A 68
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large (over 1 hectare
of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
APPENDIX 7

D. How many farmers actually participated in both 1stad 2nd field days? {( A + B)-C}
Demonstration and Control Results:
Will the demonstration farmer use this technology next year? YES / No.
Mention reason if No : .......................................................................................................
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large (over 1 hectare
of land)
Responsible Officer
Supervising Officer
designation
designation
Name
Name
Signature
Signature
Plot type
Value per
Kg (Tk.)
Duration
of rop
Yield (kg)
Date of
Harvest
Total value
(Tk.)
Input Cost
(Tk.)
E
Demonstra
tion Plot (A)
Control
Plot (B)
Difference
(A-B)
D
F
C
Profit(+)/Loss (-) = (F-C) Benefit –Cost Ratio = (F : C)
A 69
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total

TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION MONITORING SYSTEM (TEMS): TEMS FORM 2- TECHNOLOGY
SUMMARY FORM(BASED ON TECHNOLOGY)
(For summarizing relevant data of Region/District/Upazila level)
Name of Region/District/Upazila: ............................................................. Extension method
or event type: ..........................................
Crop: ......................................................... Season: .................................................................
Year: ..................................
Technology name: ........................................................
Total event number of this technology held at concerned Region/District/Upazila: ...................
Total farmers who attended the events of this technology held at concerned
Region/District/Upazila: (For Result Demonstration use section ‘D’and for other event
use(*****)of TEMS Form1)
No of farmers of all classes who now think they know how to use the technology/ideas
No of participating farmers of all class who indent to test the technology
Reason for poor event performance:
A) Reason for Poor attendance (less than 75% of target): ................................................................
............................................................................................................................................
B) Reason for poor no. of farmers who now think they know how to use the technology/ideas
(under 50% of total attending farmer): .....................................................................................
Small (up to 1 hectare)
All farm sizes
(Small + Large)
Large(over 1 hectare
of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
Male
Female
Total
No.
No.
No.
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
ciy æl
bvix
mKj †kwÖ Yi Kl... K (ciy æl+bvix)
kZKiv nvi (%)
msL ̈v
msL ̈v
†gvU msL ̈v
kZKiv nvi (%)
kZKiv nvi (%)
Percentage (%)
No.
No.
No.
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
A 70
APPENDIX 7(2)
Male
Female
Total (Male + Female
APPENDIX 7

C) Reason for poor number of farmers who intend to test the technology (under 25% of total
attending farmer): ..........................................................................................................................
Cost effectiveness of extension outreach (Tk.):
Complete this section for Result Demonstration only
Average difference between Demonstration and Control:
Note: To complete column ‘F’ add up all results ofsame technology demonstration and control
plotsas in ‘C’ of TEMS Form 1 anddivide by the number of TEMS form 1 or events of same
technology. For column ‘G’ & ‘H’, follow the same procedure.
Demonstration farmer by group:
Demonstration farmers who intend to use the technology next year:
Comments & Recommendations:
Signature:
Designation:
Upazila/District/Region:
Average Cost
Difference
Average Total
Value Difference
Average yield
Difference
Average
Profit/Loss
Cost – Benefit
Ratio
(F)
(H)
(Q)
(I)= {(H) – (F)}
(J)= {(H): (F)}
Male
Female
Grand Total
Small
(up to 1
hectare)
Large (over 1
hectare of
land)
Total
Large (over 1
hectare of
land)
Total
Small
(up to 1
hectare)
No. of Farmer
Percentage (%)
Farmers’
number & %
Small (up to 1
hectare)
Male
Large (over 1
hectare of land)
Total
Small (up to
1 hectare)
Female
Large (over 1
hectare land)
Grand
Total
A 71
G chÖ wy 3 eve` †gvU e ̈q [dig 1 G GKB
ai‡bi chÖ wy 3i Rb ̈ e ̈‡qi †hvMdj]
chÖ wy 3 hvPvBKi‡Y B”Qv
†cvlYKvix Kl... K cwÖ Z e ̈q
wb‡RivB chÖ wy 3 e ̈envi Ki‡Z
cvi‡eb Ggb Kl... K cwÖ Z e ̈q
AskMnÖ YKvix
Kl... K cwÖ Z e ̈q
Total cost of the event (add up cost
for same technology as in form 1)
Cost per farmer
intending to test the
technology
Cost per farmer understanding
(who think they know how to
use the technology/ideas)
Cost per
farmer
Attending
Total

TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION MONITORING SYSTEM (TEMS): TEMS FORM 3– EXTENSION
EVENT TYPE SUMMARY FORM(BASED ON EVENTS)
(For summarizing relevant data ofRegion/District/Upazila level)
Name of Region/District/Upazila: ....................................................... Extension method or
Event type: .............................................
Crop: ................................................................. Season: ...............................................................
Year:........................................................
Total events of this type conducted at concerned Region/District/Upazila : ................................
Total farmers who attended the event of this type held at concerned Region/District/Upazila:
Number of attending farmers of all classes who think they know how to use the
technology/ideas
Number of participating farmers of all classes who indent to test the ideas/technology
Cost Effectiveness of Extension Outreach/Event(Tk.):
Male
Female
Total (Male + Female)
Small (up to 1 hectare)
Total of All Classes
(Small + Large)
Large(over 1 hectare
of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
Male
Female
Total of all classes (Male+Female)
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Total cost of all event of this
type (add up costs for same
technology as in form 1)
Cost per farmer
intending to test
ideas/technology
(Tk.)
Cost per farmer who
think they know how
to use the technology/
ideas (understand)
Cos per
contacted
farmer
A 72
APPENDIX 7(3)
APPENDIX 7

Appropriateness of Publicity/Timing /Venue in Conducting Extension Event:
Complete this section for Result/Method Demonstrationonly
Breakdown of Demonstration farmers by Target Group:
Appropriateness of Timing /Site in EstablishingDemonstration
Signature:
Designation:
Upazila/District/Region:
Date:
Large (over 1 hectare of land)
Small (up to 1 hectare)
Total Farmers (Large+Small)
Events where publicity was adequate Evets where timing was appropriate Events where venue was appropriate
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Demonstrations with appropriate timing
Demonstrations with appropriate site
Number
Number
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
A 73

Total of all classes
(Small + Large)
TECHNOLOGY EXTENSION MONITORING SYSTEM (TEMS): TEMS FORM 4– EXTENSION AREA
SUMMARY FORM
(For summarizing relevant data of Region/District/Upazila level)
Name of Region/District/Upazila: ............................................................................................
Season: ................................................................... Year: ......................................................
Summary of Main Technologies Promoted within the Region/District/Upazila
Summary of Main Events Held within the Region/District/Upazila:
Number of Farmers Attending in all Events:
Sl.
No.
Result Demonstrations & Field Days
Method Demonstrations
Farmers’ Training Courses
Motivational Tours
Other
Total of all Event Types
Event type
Number of
events
Number
Percentage
(%)
No. of farmers
attending
Farmers intending to test
new ideas/technology
A 74
Small (up to 1 hectare)
Large (over 1 hectare of land)
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Total
Total
Total
APPENDIX 7(4)
Sl. No.
Name of technology
Name of technology
Sl. No.
Number of
events
Number of
events
APPENDIX 7

Number of farmers within all classes who indent to test the ideas/technology
Comments/Recommendations:
Signature, Designation, Date
Male
Female
Total (Male + Female)
Number
Number
Number
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Percentage (%)
Total cost of the extension
events
Cost per farmer attended
Costper farmer indenting to test
the ideas/technology
A 75

IMPACT ASSESSMENT SYSTEM: IAS FORM 1
(To be used at Block level for collection of primary information)
.............................. Season., Date .............................. From ............................ To .............................
Block .............................. Upazila .......................................... District ..........................................
1.1
Transfer of Developed Varieties and Technologies to Farmers:
1.1.1 No. of person/farmers trained: Male ........................... Female .......................................
1.1.2 Technology of the established demonstration: ........................................ No. ................
Date of establishment ......................................., Production ............................................,
Benefit -Cost Ratio ................., Framers who intend to adopt this technology next time?
Yes/No. If No. Why/reason .......................................................
1.1.3 No. of disseminated new varieties and technologies ........................................................
1.1.4 No. of field days/farmers rally arranged ......................... No. of motivational tour: ............
No. of farmers participated: Male ............. , Female ............., Technology .......................
Percentage of farmers intend to use the demonstrated technology next time ..................
1.3
Awareness building about Food-Value and Nutrition:
1.3.1 No. of person/farmers trained: Male .........................., Female .......................................
1.4
Seed Production, Preservation and Distribution:
1.4.1 Foundation seed distributed (only for demonstration) m. ton ..........................................
1.4.2 Distributed seeds of stress tolerant variety ........................ m. ton
1.4.3 Seed preserved following improved method at farmer level: Crop ..................................
Variety ......................................... Quantity (m. ton) .....................................................
1.4.4 No. of Agricultural equipment distributed under development assistance .....................
No. purchased personally ...............................................................................................
1.0 Annual Performance Agreement Activities APA):
1.2 E-Extension Service on Agriculture:
1.2.1 No. of farmer group/farmers’ club formed: .....................................................................
1.2.2 Online service at Union ............ No. of service provided to farmer through Mobile ..........
1.2.3 No. of farmer to whom service provided at FIAC/AICC/Union Digital Centre b SAAO:
Male .............................., Female ........................................
A 76
APPENDIX 8(1)
APPENDIX 8

Crop
Production
(m. ton)
Area (ha)
Main verities
No.
Assessed yield per hectare m. tn
Rice
Wheat
Maize
Potato
Vegetables
Jute
Pulses
Oil crops
Spices
Fruit
Others
1.5
Promotion of Organic Fertilizer, Green Manuring andMicrobial Fertilizer
1.5.1 No. person/farmers trained: Male ................................. Female
1..5.2 No. of compost heap/vermicomposting ............ Quantity used in the field ........... m.ton
1.5.3 No. of established demonstration on green manuring .................. Area of land .........ha.
1.5.4 Use of microbial fertilizer- Crop............................ Land ..........................ha.
2.1 Visited by SAAO to Farmers’ group/CIG/SFG/IANEPfarmer group/ISSRBP farmer group/IFMFFS group/IPM-FFS group/village based organization/Club/Producer Organization:
No. ................... No of group meeting attended.................... No. of farmers attended in
the meeting-Male .......................................... Female .........................................................
2.2 No. of individual farm visit: .............................................. Large .......................................
Medium ...................... Small ...................... Marginal ................... Tenant .......................
2.3 Distribution of fruit saplings- No. ......, Variety ....... No of fruit garden ......, Area of land .......
2.4 Use of pheromone trap -No .................................... Land under Bio-Pesticides .................ha
2.5 Land under safe-vegetable cultivation ....................... ha. Land under Good Agricultural
Practices (GAP) -..............................ha.
2.6 Perching in the rice field .........................ha. Percentage ..........................
2.7 ...............................................................................
2.0 Other Activities:
3.0 Area and Production under Crop Cultivated
A 77

4.0 Pest Surveillance on Brown Plant Hoppe/New Pest/Diseases .......................................;
Affected Area .................................... ha.
5.0 .................. Natural Disaster, /......................,Pest Affected - Completely Damaged Cropped
Area ........................... ha.,Production Loss ....................................... M. Ton
6.0 Fertilizer Reserve by BCIC/BADC Dealers: Urea ..............., TSP ............ MoP .............. m.ton
7.0 Statement of Partnership Activities with other Extension Service Providing Organization/
Research Instructions: ......................................................
8.0 Problem Found on Implementation of Agricultural Activities ......................................... and
Advice/Recommendations to resolve the Problems ...............................................................
Follow-up by Higher Authority: Name ...................................................................................,
Designation ................................................ Mobile..............................................................,
e-mail. ...................................................................................................................................
Name of Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officer............................................................................
Mobile..................................................................................................................................
Signature. ...........................
Name of Supervising Officer: ................................................................................................,
Designation ........................................................... Mobile ....................................................,
e-mail ..................................................................... Remarks ....................................................,
Signature. ..........................
A 78
APPENDIX 8

IMPACT ASSESSMENT SYSTEM: IAS FORM 2
(Information Summary Form for using at Upazila/District/Regional level)
.............................. Season, Date .......................... From ............................ .. To ..............................
Block ........................................ Upazila ........................................, District ...........................
Region ............................................
1.1
Transfer of Developed Varieties and Technologies to Farmers:
1.1.1 No. of person/farmers trained: Male ................................... Female ...................................
1.1.2 Technology of the established demonstration: ..................................... No. ......................
Date of establishment ................................., Production ..................................................,
Benefit -Cost Ratio .................., Framers who intend to adopt this technology next time?

Yes/No. If No. Why/reason ...................................................................................................
1.1.3 No of disseminated new varieties................................, and technologies ..........................
1.1.4 No. of field days/farmers rally arranged .............. No. of motivational tour: ......................
No. of farmers participated: Male ............ , Female ..........., Technology ..........................
Percentage of farmers intend to adopt the demonstrated technology next time
................................................................................................................................................
1.2.1 No. of farmer group/farmers’ club formed: ....................................................................
1.2.2 Online service at Union ............................. No. of service provided to farmer through
Mobile ....
1.2.3 No. of farmers to whom service provided at FIAC/AICC/Union Digital Centre by SAAO:
Male ............................, Female ..............................
1.3.1 No. of person/farmers trained: Male ...................................., Female ..............................
1.0 Annual Performance Agreement Activities APA):
1.2 E-Extension Service on Agriculture:
1.3 Awareness building about Food-Value and Nutrition:
A 79
APPENDIX 8(2)

1.4 Seed Production, Preservation and Distribution:
1.5 Promotion of Organic Fertilizer, Green Manuring andMicrobial Fertilizer
1.4.1 Foundation seed distributed (only for demonstration) m. ton ...........................................
1.4.2 Distributed seeds of stress tolerant variety ............................................................. m. ton
1.4.3 Seed preserved following improved method at farmer level: Crop ...................................
Variety ........................................... Quantity (m. ton) ..........................................................
1.4.4 No. of Agricultural equipment distributed under development assistance .......................
No. purchased personally ..................................................................................................
1.5.1 No. person/farmers trained: Male ................................. Female ........................................
1..5.2 No. of compost heap/vermicomposting ............. Quantity used in the field ........... m.ton
1.5.3 No. of established demonstration on green manuring ............... Area of land ............. ha.
1.5.4 Use of microbial fertilizer- Crop.................................... Land .......................................... ha.
2.1 Visited by SAAO to Farmers’ group/CIG/SFG/IANEPfarmer group/ISSRBP farmer
group/IFM-FFS group/IPM-FFS group/village based organization/Club/Producer
Organization:
No. ................................ No. of group meeting attended ............................ No. of farmers
attended in the meeting-Male ................................... Female ..............................................
2.2 No. of individual farm visit: ........................ Large ....................... Medium ..................
Small ..................................... Marginal .................................... Tenant ...............................
2.3 Distribution of fruit saplings- No. ..................................., Variety .........................................
No. of fruit garden ........................................., Area of land ...................................................
2.4 Use of pheromone trap -No. .......................... Land under Bio-Pesticides ........................ ha
2.5 Land under safe-vegetable cultivation ..................................................................... ha.
Land under Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) -...............................................................ha.
2.6 Perching in the rice field ............................................. ha. Percentage ..................................
2.7 ..............................................................................................................................................
2.0 Other Activities:
A 80
APPENDIX 8

3.0 Area and Production under Crop Cultivated
4.0 Pest Surveillance on Brown Plant Hoppe/New Pest/Diseases .........................................;
Affected Area ........................................ ha.
5.0 .......................... Natural Disaster, /...................,Pest Affected - Completely Damaged
Cropped Area ..................................ha.,Production Loss ........................................... M. Ton
6.0 Fertilizer Reserve by BCIC/BADC Dealers: Urea ............., TSP ............... MoP ............. m.ton
7.0 Statement of Partnership Activities with other Extension Service Providing Organization/
Research Instructions: ............................................................................................................
8.0 Problem Found on Implementation of Agricultural Activities ................................... and
Advice/Recommendations to resolve the Problems ...............................................................
Follow-up by Higher Authority: Name ........................................, Designation........................
Mobile .........................................................., e-mail ...............................................................
Name of Sub-Assistant Agricultural Officer ................................... Mobile .............................
Signature ..............................
Name of Supervising Officer: ......................................, Designation ......................................
Mobile .........................................................., e-mail. ............................................................
Remarks .................................................................................................................................
Signature. ..............................
A 81
Crop
Production
(m. ton)
Area (ha)
Main verities
No.
Assessed yield per hectare m. tn
Rice
Wheat
Maize
Potato
Vegetables
Jute
Pulses
Oil crops
Spices
Fruit
Others
Sample Crop Cutting done with BBS/DAE officials